the remote cause
in 1517, fray bartolomé de las casas, feeling
great pity for the indians who grew worn and
lean in the drudging infernos of the antillean
gold mines, proposed to emperor charles v
that negroes be brought to the isles of the
caribbean, so that they might grow worn and
lean in the drudging infernos of the antillean
gold mines. to that odd variant on the species
philanthropist we owe an infinitude of things:
w. c. handy's blues; the success achieved in
paris by the uruguayan attorney-painter pedro
figari*; the fine runaway-slave prose of the
likewise uruguayan vicente rossi*; the
mythological stature of abraham lincoln; the
half-million dead of the war of secession; the
$3.3 billion spent on military pensions; the
statue of the imaginary semblance of antonio
(falucho) ruiz*; the inclusion of the verb
"lynch" in respectable dictionaries; the
impetuous king vidor film hallelujah; the
stout bayonet charge of the regiment of "blacks
and tans" (the color of their skins, not their
uniforms) against that famous hill near montevideo*;
the gracefulness of certain elegant
young ladies; the black man who killed martín
fierro; that deplorable rumba the peanutseller;
the arrested and imprisoned
napoleonism of toussaint l'ouverture; the
cross and the serpent in haiti; the blood of
goats whose throats are slashed by the papalois
machete; the habanera that is the mother of the
tango; the candombe. and yet another thing:
the evil and magnificent existence of the cruel
redeemer lazarus morell.*
the place
the father of waters, the mississippi, the
grandest river in the world, was the worthy
stage for the deeds of that incomparable
blackguard. (alvarezde pineda discovered this
great river, though it was first explored by
hernando de soto, conqueror of peru, who
whiled away his months in the prison of the
inca atahualpa teaching his jailer chess. when
de soto died, the river's waters were his grave.)
the mississippi is a broad-chested river, a dark
and infinite brother of the paraná, the uruguay,
the amazon, and the orinoco. it is a river of
mulatto-hued water; more than four hundred
million tons of mud, carried by that water,
insult the gulf of mexico each year. all that
venerable and ancient waste has created a delta
where gigantic swamp cypresses grow from the
slough of a continent in perpetual dissolution
and where labyrinths of clay, dead fish, and
swamp reeds push out the borders and extend
the peace of their fetid empire. upstream,
arkansas and ohio have their bottom-lands,
too, populated by a jaundiced and hungrylooking
race, prone to fevers, whose eyes gleam
at the sight of stone and iron, for they know
only sand and driftwood and muddy water.
the men
in the early nineteenth century (the period
that interests us) the vast cotton plantations on
the riverbanks were worked from sunup to
sundown by negro slaves. they slept in wooden
cabins on dirt floors.
apart from the mother-child relationship,
kinship was conventional and murky; the slaves
had given names, but not always surnames.
they did not know how to read. their soft
falsetto voices sang an english of drawn-out
vowels. they worked in rows, stooped under the
overseer's lash. they would try to escape, and
men with full beards would leap astride
beautiful horses to hunt them down with baying 
dogs.
onto an alluvium of beastlike hopefulness
and african fear there had sifted the words of
the scripture; their faith, therefore, was
christian. go down, moses, they would sing,
low and in unison. the mississippi served them
as a magnificent image of the sordid jordan.
the owners of that hard-worked land and
those bands of negroes were idlers, greedy
gentlemen with long hair who lived in widefronted
mansions that looked out upon the
river—their porches always pseudo-greek with
columns made of soft white pine. good slaves
cost a thousand dollars, but they didn't last
long. some were so ungrateful as to sicken and
die. a man had to get the most he could out of
such uncertain investments. that was why the
slaves were in the fields from sunup to
sundown; that was why the fields were made to
yield up their cotton or tobacco or sugarcane
every year. the female soil, worn and haggard
from bearing that impatient culture's get, was
left barren within a few years, and a formless,
clayey desert crept into the plantations. 
on broken-down farms, on the outskirts of
the cities, in dense fields of sugarcane, and on
abject mud flats lived the "poor whites"; they
were fisher-men, sometime hunters, horse
thieves. they would sometimes even beg pieces
of stolen food from the negroes. and yet in
their prostration they held one point of pride—
their blood, untainted by "the cross of color"
and unmixed. lazarus morell was one of these
men.
the man
the daguerreotypes printed in american
magazines are not actually of morell. that
absence of a genuine likeness of a man as
memorable and famous as morell cannot be
coincidental. it is probably safe to assume that
morell refused to sit for the silvered plate—
essentially, so as to leave no pointless traces;
incidentally, so as to enhance his mystery.... we
do know, however, that he was not particularly
good-looking as a young man and that his closeset
eyes and thin lips did not conspire in his
favor. the years, as time went on, imparted to 
him that peculiar majesty that white-haired
blackguards, successful (and unpunished)
criminals, seem generally to possess. he was a
southern gentleman of the old school, in spite
of his impoverished childhood and his shameful
life. he was not ignorant of the scriptures, and
he preached with singular conviction. "i once
saw lazarus morell in the pulpit," wrote the
owner of a gambling house in baton rouge,
"and i heard his edifying words and saw the
tears come to his eyes. i knew he was a
fornicator, a nigger-stealer, and a murderer in
the sight of the lord, but tears came to my eyes
too."
another testimony to those holy outpourings
is provided by morell himself: "i opened the
bible at random, put my finger on the first verse
that came to hand—st. paul it was—and
preached for an hour and twenty minutes.
crenshaw and the boys didn't put that time to
bad use, neither, for they rounded up all the
folks' horses and made off with 'em. we sold
'em in the state of arkansas, all but one bay
stallion, the most spirited thing youever laid
eyes on, that i kept for myself. crenshaw had
his eye on that horse, too, but i convinced him
it warn't the horse for him."
the method
horses stolen in one state and sold in
another were but the merest digression in
morell's criminal career, but they did prefigure
the method that would assure him his place in a
universal history of iniquity. his method was
unique not only because of the sui generis
circumstances that shaped it, but also because
of the depravity it required, its vile
manipulation of trust, and its gradual evolution,
like the terrifying unfolding of a nightmare. al
capone and bugs morano operate with lavish
capital and subservient machine guns in a great
city, but their business is vulgar. they fight for a
monopoly, and that is the extent of it....
in terms of numbers, morell at one time
could command more than a thousand sworn
confederates.
there were two hundred in the heads, or
general council, and it was the heads that gave 
the orders that the other eight hundred
followed. these "strikers," as they were called,
ran all the risk. if they stepped out of line, they
would be handed over to the law or a rock
would be tied to their feet and their bodies
would be sunk in the swirling waters of the
river. often, these men were mulattoes. their
wicked mission was this:
in a momentary wealth of gold and silver
rings, to inspire respect, they would roam the
vast plantations of the south. they would
choose some wretched black man and offer him
his freedom. they would tell him that if he'd
run away from his master and allow them to
resell him on another plantation far away, they
would give him a share of the money and help
him escape a second time. then, they said,
they'd convey him to free soil.... money and
freedom — ringing silver dollars and freedom to
boot — what greater temptation could they hold
out to him? the slave would work up the
courage for his first escape.
the river was a natural highway. a canoe, the
hold of a riverboat, a barge, a raft as big as the 
sky with a pilothouse on the bow or with a roof
of canvas sheeting ... the place didn't matter;
what mattered was knowing that you were
moving, and that you were safe on the
unwearying river.... they would sell him on
another plantation. he would run away again,
to the sugarcane fields or the gullies. and it
would be then that the fearsome and terrible
benefactors (whom he was beginning to distrust
by now) would bring up obscure "expenses" and
tell him they had to sell him one last time.
when he escaped the next time, they told him,
they'd give him his percentage of the two sales,
and his liberty. the man would let himself be
sold, he would work for a while, and then he
would risk the dogs and whips and try to escape
on his own. he would be brought back bloody,
sweaty, desperate, and tired.
the final freedom
we have not yet considered the legal aspect
of the crime. the negro would not be put up for
sale by morell's henchmen until his escape had
been advertised and a reward offered for his
capture. at that point, anybody could lay hold
of the slave. thus, when he was later sold, it was
only a breach of trust, not stealing, and it was
pointless for the owner to go to law, since he'd
never recover his losses.
all this was calculated to leave morell's mind
at ease, but not forever. the negro could talk;
the negro was capable, out of pure gratitude or
misery, of talking. a few drinks of rye whisky in
a whorehouse in cairo, illinois, where the slaveborn
son of a bitch went to squander some of
those silver dollars burning a hole in his pocket
(and that they'd no reason to give him, when it
came right down to it), and the cat would be out
of the bag. the abolitionist party was making
things hot in the north during this time—a mob
of dangerous madmen who denied a man's right
to his own property, preached the freeing of the
blacks, and incited the slaves to rebellion.
morell was not about to let himself be confused
with those anarchists. he was no yankee, he
was a southerner, a white man, the son and
grandson of white men, and he hoped someday
to retire from his business and be a gentleman 
and possess his own league upon league of
cotton fields and his own bow-backed rows of
slaves. with his experience, he was not a man to
take point-less risks.
the runaway expected his freedom.
therefore, the nebulous mulattoes of lazarus
morell would give a sign (which might have
been no more than a wink) and the runaway
would be freed from sight, hearing, touch,
daylight, iniquity, time, benefactors, mercy, air,
dogs, the universe, hope, sweat—and from
himself. a bullet, a low thrust with a blade, a
knock on the head, and the turtles and catfish of
the mississippi would be left to keep the secret
among themselves.
the catastrophe
manned by trustworthy fellows, the business
was bound to prosper. by early 1834, some
seventy negro slaves had been "emancipated"
by morell, and others were ready to follow their
fortunate forerunners. the zone of operations
was larger now, and new members had to be
admitted to the gang. 
among those who took the oath, there was
one young man, virgil stewart, from arkansas,
who very soon distinguished himself by his
cruelty. this boy was the nephew of a
gentleman who had lost a great number of
slaves. in august of 1834, he broke his vow and
denounced morell and the others. morell's
house in new orleans was surrounded by the
authorities, but morell somehow (owing to
some oversight
—or a bribe in the right quarters) managed to
escape.
three days passed. morell hid for that period
in an old house with vine-covered courtyards
and statues, on toulouse street. apparently he
had almost nothing to eat and spent his days
roaming barefoot through the large, dark
rooms, smoking a thoughtful cheroot. through
a slave in the house, he sent two letters to
natchez and another to red river. on the
fourth day, three men entered the house; they
sat talking things over with morell until almost
daybreak. on the fifth day, morell got out of
bed at nightfall, borrowed a razor, and carefully 
shaved off his beard. he then dressed and left
the house. slowly and calmly he made his way
through the northern outskirts of the city.
when he reached open country, out in the
bottomlands of the mississippi, he breathed
easier.
his plan was one of drunken courage. he
proposed to exploit the last men that still owed
him respect: the accommodating negroes of the
south-land themselves. these men had seen
their comrades run away, and had not seen
them brought back. they thought, therefore,
that they'd found freedom. morell's plan called
for a general uprising of the negroes, the
capture and sack of new orleans, and the
occupation of the territory. a pitiless and
depraved man, and now almost undone by
treachery, morell planned a response of
continental proportions—a response in which
criminality would become redemptive, and
historic. to that end, he headed for natchez,
where his strength ran deeper. i reproduce his
own narration of that journey:
"i walked four days," he reported, "and no
opportunity offered for me to get a horse. the
fifth day, i had stopped at a creek to get some
water and rest a while. while i was sitting on a
log, looking down the road the way that i had
come, a man came in sight riding on a goodlooking
horse. the very moment i saw him, i
was determined to have his horse.... i arose and
drew an elegant rifle pistol on him and ordered
him to dismount. he did so, and i took his
horse by the bridle and pointed down the creek,
and ordered him to walk before me. he went a
few hundred yards and stopped. i ... made him
undress himself, all to his shirt and drawers,
and ordered him to turn his back to me. he
said, 'if you are determined to kill me, let me
have time to pray before i die.' i told him i had
no time to hear him pray.
he turned around and dropped on his knees,
and i shot him through the back of the head. i
ripped open his belly and took out his entrails,
and sunk him in the creek. i then searched his
pockets, and found four hundred dollars and
thirty-seven cents, and a number of papers that
i did not take time to examine. i sunk the
pocket-book and papers and his hat, in the
creek. his boots were bran-new, and fitted me
genteelly; and i put them on and sunk my old
shoes in the creek....
"i mounted as fine a horse as ever i
straddled, and directed my course for
natchez."*
the interruption
morell leading uprisings of negroes that
dreamed of hanging him ... morell hanged by
armies of negroes that he had dreamed of
leading ... it pains me to admit that the history
of the mississippi did not seize upon those rich
opportunities. nor, contrary to all poetic justice
(and poetic symmetry), did the river of his
crimes become his tomb. on the 2nd of
january, 1835, lazarus morell died of
pulmonary congestion in the hospital at
natchez, where he'd been admitted under the
name silas buckley. another man in the ward
recognized him. on that day, and on the 4th of
january, slaves on scattered plantations
attempted to revolt, but they were put down
with no great loss of blood.
the improbable impostor tom castro
i give him that name because it was by that
name he was known (in 1850 or thereabouts)
on the streets and in the houses of talcahuano,
santiago de chile, and valparaiso, and it seems
only fair that he take it again, now that he has
returned to those lands—even if only as a ghost,
or a saturday-night amusement.1
i have chosen this metaphor in order to
remind the reader that these vile biographies
appeared in the saturday supplement of an
evening newspaper
the birth register in wapping calls him
arthur orton, and gives the date of his birth as
june 7, 1834.
we know that he was the son of a butcher,
that his childhood was spent in the gray
meanness of the london slums, and that he
harkened to the call of the sea. that story is not 
an un-common one; "running away to sea" was
the traditional english way to break with
parental authority—the heroic ritual of
initiation. geography recommended such a
course, as did the scriptures themselves: "they
that go down to the sea in ships, that do
business in great waters; these see the works of
the lord, and his wonders in the deep" (psalms
107:23-24). orton fled his deplorable, dingypink-colored
suburb and went down to the sea
in a ship; with ingrained disappointment he
regarded the southern cross, and he jumped
ship at valparaiso. he was a gentle idiot.
though by all logic he could (and should) have
starved to death, his muddle-headed joviality,
his permanent grin, and his infinite docility
earned him the favor of a certain family named
castro, whose patronym he took ever after as
his own. no traces of his stay in south america
remain, but we know that his gratitude never
flagged: in 1861 he turned up in australia, still
bearing the name tom castro.
in sydney he made the acquaintance of a
man named ebenezer bogle, a negro servant. 
bogle, though not handsome, had that reposeful
and monumental air, that look of wellengineered
solidity, often possessed by a black
man of a certain age, a certain corporeal
substance, a certain authority. bogle had
another quality, as well—though some
textbooks in anthropology deny the attribute to
his race: he was possessed of genius. (we shall
see the proof of that soon enough.) he was a
temperate, decent man, the ancient african
appetites in him corrected by the customs and
excesses of calvinism. aside from the
visitations from his god (which we shall
describe below), he was normal in every way;
his only eccentricity was a deep-seated and
shamefaced fear that made him hesitate at
street corners and at crossings, survey east,
west, north, and south, and try to outguess the
violent vehicle that he was certain would end
his days.
orton came upon his future friend one
afternoon as bogle was standing on a run-down
corner in sydney trying to screw up the courage
to face his imagined death. after watching him 
for several minutes, orton offered him his arm,
and the two astounded men crossed the
inoffensive street. out of that now-bygone
evening a protectorate was forged: the
monumental, unsure negro over the obese
wapping simpleton.
in september of 1865, the two men read a
heartbreaking piece of news in the local paper.
the adored one deceased
in the waning days of april, 1854 (as orton
was inspiring the effusions of chilean
hospitality, which was as welcoming as that
country's patios), there had sunk in the waters
of the atlantic a steamship christened the
mermaid, bound from rio de janeiro to
liverpool. among the drowned had been one
roger charles tichborne, an english military
officer brought up in france, and the firstborn
son of one of england's leading catholic
families. how-ever improbable it may seem, the
death of this frenchified young man (a young
man who had spoken english with the most
cultured of parisian ac-cents and who had
inspired the unparalleled envy that can only be
aroused by french intelligence, grace, and
affectation) was an event of supreme
importance in the destiny of arthur orton, who
had never so much as laid eyes on him. lady
tichborne, roger's horrified mother, refused to
believe the reports of his death. she published
heartrending advertisements in all the major
newspapers, and one of those advertisements
fell into the soft, funereal hands of ebenezer
bogle, who conceived a brilliant plan.
the virtues of unlikeness
tichborne had been a slim, genteel young
man with a reserved and some-what selfabsorbed
air. he had sharp features, straight
black hair, tawny skin, sparkling eyes, and an
irritatingly precise way of speaking.
orton was an irrepressible rustic, a "yokel,"
with a vast belly, features of infinite vague-ness,
fair and freckled skin, wavy light-brown hair,
sleepy eyes, and no, or irrelevant, conversation.
bogle decided that it was orion's duty to take
the first steamer for europe and realize lady
tichborne's hope that her son had not
perished—by declaring himself to be that son.
the plan had an irrational genius to it. let me
give a simple example: if an impostor had
wanted to pass himself off as the emperor of
germany and king of prussia in 1914, the first
thing he'd have done would be fake the
upturned mustaches, the lifeless arm, the
authoritarian scowl, the gray cape, the
illustrious and much-decorated chest, and the
high helmet.
bogle was more subtle: he would have
brought forth a smooth-faced kaiser with no
military traits, no proud eagles whatsoever, and
a left arm in unquestionable health. we have no
need of the metaphor; we know for a fact that
bogle produced a fat, flabby tichborne with the
sweet smile of an idiot, light-brown hair, and a
thoroughgoing ignorance of french. bogle knew
that a perfect facsimile of the beloved roger
charles tichborne was impossible to find; he
knew as well that any similarities he might
achieve would only underscore certain
inevitable differences. he therefore gave up the 
notion of likeness altogether. he sensed that
the vast ineptitude of his pretense would be a
convincing proof that this was no fraud, for no
fraud would ever have so flagrantly flaunted
features that might so easily have convinced.
we should also not overlook the all-powerful
collaboration of time: the vicissitudes of
fortune, and fourteen years of antipodean life,
can change a man.
another essential argument in favor of
bogle's plan: lady tichborne's repeated and
irrational advertisements showed that she was
certain that roger charles had not died, and
that she would will herself to recognize him
when he came.
the meeting
tom castro, ever accommodating, wrote to
lady tichborne. in order to prove his identity,
he invoked the irrefutable proof of the two
moles near his left nipple and that painful and
therefore unforgettable episode from his
childhood when a swarm of bees had attacked
him. the letter was brief and, in the image of 
bogle and tom castro, free of any scruples as to
the way words ought to be spelled. in her
majestic solitude in her hôtel particulier in
paris, lady tichborne read and reread the letter
through happy tears, and in a few days she had
recaptured the recollections her son had
invoked.
on january 16, 1867, roger charles
tichborne called upon his mother. his
respectful servant, ebenezer bogle, preceded
him. it was a winter day of bright sunshine;
lady tichborne's tired eyes were veiled with
tears. the black man threw the windows open.
the light served as a mask; the mother
recognized the prodigal and opened her arms to
him. now that she had him in the flesh, she
might do without his diary and the letters he
had written her from brazil—the treasured
reflections of the son which had fed her
loneliness through those fourteen melancholy
years. she returned them to him proudly; not
one was missing.
bogle smiled discreetly; now he could
research the gentle ghost of roger charles. 
ad majorem dei gloriam
that joyous recognition, which seems to obey
the tradition of classical tragedy, should be the
crown of this story, leaving happiness assured
(or at least more than possible) for the three
persons of the tale—the true mother, the
apocryphal and obliging son, and the
conspirator repaid for the providential
apotheosis of his industry. but fate (for such is
the name that we give the infinite and
unceasing operation of thousands of
intertwined causes) would not have it. lady
tichborne died in 1870, and the family brought
charges against arthur orton for impersonation
and usurpation of their dead kinsman's estate.
as they themselves were afflicted with neither
tears nor loneliness (though the same cannot be
said of greed), they had never believed in the
obese and almost illiterate lost son who had so
inopportunely reappeared from australia.
orton's claim was supported by the
innumerable creditors who had decided that he
was tichborne; they wanted their bills paid. he 
also drew upon the friendship of the old family
solicitor, edward hopkins, and that of an
antiquary named francis j. baigent. but this,
though much, was not enough. bogle believed
that if they were to win this round, a
groundswell of public support was wanted. he
called for his top hat and his black umbrella and
he went out for a walk through the decorous
streets of london, in search of inspiration. it
was just evening; bogle wandered about until a
honey-colored moon was mirrored in the
rectangular waters of the public fountains. and
then he was visited by his god. bogle whistled
for a cab and had himself driven to the flat of
the antiquary baigent. baigent sent a long letter
to the times, denouncing this "tichborne
claimant" as a brazen hoax. the letter was
signed by father goudron, of the society of
jesus. other, equally papist, denunciations
followed. the effect was immediate: the right
sort of person could not fail to see that sir
roger charles tichborne was the target of a
despicable jesuit plot. 
the coach
the trial lasted one hundred ninety days.
some hundred witnesses swore that the accused
was roger charles tichborne—among them,
four comrades-at-arms from the 6th dragoons.
orton's supporters steadfastly maintained that
he was no impostor—had he been, they pointed
out, he would surely have attempted to copy the
juvenile portraits of his model. and besides,
lady tichborne had recognized and accepted
him; clearly, in such matters, a mother does not
err. all was going well, then—more or less—
until an old sweetheart of orton's was called to
testify. not a muscle of bogle's face twitched at
that perfidious maneuver by the "family"; he
called for his black umbrella and his top hat and
he went out into the decorous streets of london
to seek a third inspiration. we shall never know
whether he found it.
shortly before he came to primrose hill, he
was struck by that terrible vehicle that had been
pursuing him through all these years. bogle saw
it coming and managed to cry out, but he could
not manage to save himself. he was thrown
violently against the paving stones. the hack's
dizzying hooves cracked his skull open.
the specter
tom castro was tichborne's ghost, but a
poor sort of ghost, inhabited by the daemon
bogle. when he was told that bogle had been
killed, he simply collapsed. he continued to tell
his lies, but with very little enthusiasm and a
great deal of self-contradiction. it was easy to
foresee the end.
on the 27th of february, 1874, arthur orton
(alias tom castro) was sentenced to fourteen
years' penal servitude. in gaol he made himself
beloved by all; it was his lifework. his
exemplary behavior won him a reduction of
four years off his sentence. when that final
hospitality—the prison's—ran out on him, he
wandered the towns and villages of the united
kingdom, giving lectures in which he would
alternately declare his innocence and confess
his guilt. his modesty and his desire to please
remained with him always; many nights he
would begin by defending himself and wind up 
admitting all, depending upon the inclinations
of his audience. on the 2nd of april, 1898, he
died.
the widow ching—pirate
the author who uses the phrase "female
corsairs" runs the risk of calling up an awkward
image—that of the now-faded spanish operetta
with its theories of obvious servant girls playing
the part of choreographed pirates on noticeably
cardboard seas. and yet there have been cases
of female pirates—women skilled in the art of
sailing, the governance of barbarous crews, the
pursuit and looting of majestic ships on the
high seas. one such woman was mary read,
who was quoted once as saying that the
profession of piracy wasn't for just anybody,
and if you were going to practice it with dignity,
you had to be a man of courage, like herself. in
the crude beginnings of her career, when she
was not yet the captain of her own ship, a young
man she fancied was insulted by the ship's
bully. mary herself picked a quarrel with the
bully and fought him hand to hand, in the old
way of the isles of the caribbean: the long,
narrow, and undependable breechloader in her
left hand, the trusty saber in her right. the
pistol failed her, but the saber acquitted itself
admirably.... in 1720 the bold career of mary
read was interrupted by a spanish gallows, in
santiagode la vega, on the island of jamaica.
another female pirate of those waters was
anne bonney, a magnificent irishwoman of
high breasts and fiery hair who risked her life
more than once in boarding ships. she stood on
the deck with mary read, and then with her on
the scaffold. her lover, captain john rackham,
met his own noose at that same hanging. anne,
contemptuous, emerged with that harsh variant
on aixa's rebuke to boabdil*: "if you'd fought
like a man, you needn't have been hang'd like a
dog."
another woman pirate, but a more daring
and long-lived one, plied the waters of far asia,
from the yellow sea to the rivers on the borders
of annam. i am speaking of the doughty widow 
ching.
the years of apprenticeship
in 1797 the shareholders in the many pirate
ships of the yellow sea formed a consortium,
and they chose one captain ching, a just
(though strict) man, tested under fire, to be the
admiral of their new fleet. ching was so harsh
and exemplary in his sacking of the coasts that
the terrified residents implored the emperor
with gifts and tears to send them aid. nor did
their pitiable request fall upon deaf ears: they
were ordered to set fire to their villages,
abandon their fisheries, move inland, and learn
the unknown science of agriculture. they did all
this; and so, finding only deserted coastlines,
the frustrated invaders were forced into
waylaying ships—a depredation far more
unwelcome than raids on the coasts, for it
seriously threatened trade. once again, the
imperial government responded decisively: it
ordered the former fishermen to abandon their
plows and oxen and return to their oars and
nets. at this, the peasants, recalling their
former terrors, balked, so the authorities
determined upon another course: they would
make admiral ching the master of the royal
stables. ching was willing to accept the buy-off.
the stockholders, however, learned of the
decision in the nick of time, and their righteous
indignation took the form of a plate of rice
served up with poisoned greens. the delicacy
proved fatal; the soul of the former admiral and
newly appointed master of the royal stables
was delivered up to the deities of the sea. his
widow, transfigured by the double treachery,
called the pirates together, explained the
complex case, and exhorted them to spurn both
the emperor's deceitful clemency and odious
employment in the service of the shareholders
with a bent for poison. she proposed what
might be called freelance piracy. she also
proposed that they cast votes for a new admiral,
and she herself was elected. she was a saplingthin
woman of sleepy eyes and caries-riddled
smile. her oiled black hair shone brighter than
her eyes.
under mrs. ching's calm command, the
ships launched forth into danger and onto the
high seas.
the command
thirteen years of methodical adventuring
ensued. the fleet was composed of six
squadrons, each under its own banner—red,
yellow, green, black, purple—and one, the
admiral's own, with the emblem of a serpent.
the commanders of the squadrons had such
names as bird and stone, scourge of the
eastern sea, jewel of the whole crew, wave of
many fishes, and high sun.
the rules of the fleet, composed by the
widow ching herself, were unappealable and
severe, and their measured, laconic style was
devoid of those withered flowers of rhetoric that
lend a ridiculous sort of majesty to the usual
official pronouncements of the chinese (an
alarming example of which, we shall encounter
shortly). here are some of the articles of the
fleet's law:
not the least thing shall be taken privately
from the stolen and plundered goods. all shall 
be registered, and the pirate receive for himself
out of ten parts, only two: eight parts belong to
the storehouse, called the general fund; taking
anything out of this general fund without
permission shall be death.
if any man goes privately on shore, or what is
called transgressing the bars, he shall be taken
and his ears perforated in the presence of the
whole fleet; repeating the same, he shall suffer
death.
no person shall debauch at his pleasure
captive women taken in the villages and open
spaces, and brought on board a ship; he must
first re-quest the ship's purser for permission
and then go aside in the ship's hold. to use
violence against any woman without permission
of the purser shall be punished by death.*
reports brought back by prisoners state that
the mess on the pirate ships consisted mainly of
hardtack, fattened rats, and cooked rice; on
days of combat, the crew would mix gunpowder
with their liquor.
marked cards and loaded dice, drinking and
fan-tan, the visions of the opium pipe and little 
lamp filled idle hours. two swords,
simultaneously employed, were the weapon of
choice. before a boarding, the pirates would
sprinkle their cheeks and bodies with garlic
water, a sure charm against injury by fire
breathed from muzzles.
the crew of a ship traveled with their
women, the captain with his harem—which
might consist of five or six women, and be
renewed with each successive victory.
the young emperor chia-ch'lng speaks
in june or july of 1809, an imperial decree
was issued, from which i trans-late the first
paragraph and the last. many people criticized
its style:
miserable and injurious men, men who
stamp upon bread, men who ignore the outcry
of tax collectors and orphans, men whose
smallclothes bear the figure of the phoenix and
the dragon, men who deny the truth of printed
books, men who let their tears flow facing
north—such men disturb the happiness of our 
rivers and the erstwhile trustworthiness of our
seas. day and night, their frail and crippled
ships defy the tempest. their object is not a
benevolent one: they are not, and never have
been, the sea-man's bosom friend. far from
lending aid, they fall upon him with ferocity,
and make him an unwilling guest of ruin,
mutilation, and even death. thus these men
violate the natural laws of the universe, and
their offenses make rivers overflow their banks
and flood the plains, sons turn against their
fathers, the principles of wetness and dryness
exchange places…
therefore, i commend thee to the
punishment of these crimes, admiral kwolang.
never forget—clemency is the emperor's
to give; the emperor's subject would be
presumptuous in granting it. be cruel, be just,
be obeyed, be victorious.
the incidental reference to the "crippled
ships" was, of course, a lie; its purpose was to
raise the courage of kwo-lang's expedition.
ninety days later, the forces of the widow ching
engaged the empire's.
almost a thou-sand ships did battle from
sunup to sundown. a mixed chorus of bells,
drums, cannon bursts, curses, gongs, and
prophecies accompanied the action. the
empire's fleet was destroyed; admiral kwolang
found occasion to exercise neither the
mercy forbidden him nor the cruelty to which
he was exhorted. he himself performed a ritual
which our own defeated generals choose not to
observe—he committed suicide.
the terrified coastlines and riverbanks
then the six hundred junks of war and the
haughty widow's forty thousand victorious
pirates sailed into the mouth of the zhu-jiang
river, sowing fire and appalling celebrations
and orphans left and right. entire villages were
razed. in one of them, the prisoners numbered
more than a thousand. one hundred twenty
women who fled to the pathless refuge of the
nearby stands of reeds or the paddy fields were
betrayed by the crying of a baby, and sold into
slavery in macao. though distant, the pathetic
tears and cries of mourning from these
depredations came to the notice of chia-ch'ing,
the son of heaven. certain historians have
allowed themselves to believe that the news of
the ravaging of his people caused the emperor
less pain than did the defeat of his punitive
expedition. be that as it may, the emperor
organized a second expedition, terrible in
banners, sailors, soldiers, implements of war,
provisions, soothsayers and astrologers. this
time, the force was under the command of
admiral ting-kwei-heu. the heavy swarm of
ships sailed into the mouth of the zhu- jiang to
cut off the pirate fleet. the widow rushed to
prepare for battle. she knew it would be hard,
very hard, almost desperate; her men, after
many nights (and even months) of pillaging and
idleness, had grown soft. but the battle did not
begin. the sun peacefully rose and without
haste set again into the quivering reeds. the
men and the arms watched, and waited. the
noontimes were more powerful than they, and
the siestas were infinite. 
the dragon and the vixen
and yet each evening, lazy flocks of
weightless dragons rose high into the sky above
the ships of the imperial fleet and hovered
delicately above the water, above the enemy
decks. these comet-like kites were airy
constructions of rice paper and reed, and each
silvery or red body bore the identical
characters. the widow anxiously studied that
regular flight of meteors, and in it read the
confused and slowly told fable of a dragon that
had always watched over a vixen, in spite of the
vixen's long ingratitude and constant crimes.
the moon grew thin in the sky, and still the
figures of rice paper and reed wrote the same
story each evening, with almost imperceptible
variations. the widow was troubled, and she
brooded. when the moon grew fat in the sky
and in the red-tinged water, the story seemed to
be reaching its end. no one could predict
whether infinite pardon or infinite punishment
was to be let fall upon the vixen, yet the
inevitable end, whichever it might be, was
surely approaching. the widow understood. she 
threw her two swords into the river, knelt in the
bottom of a boat, and ordered that she be taken
to the flagship of the emperor's fleet.
it was evening; the sky was filled with
dragons — this time, yellow ones. the widow
murmured a single sentence, "the vixen seeks
the dragon's wing," as she stepped aboard the
ship.
the apotheosis
the chroniclers report that the vixen
obtained her pardon, and that she dedicated her
slow old age to opium smuggling. she was no
longer "the widow"; she assumed a name that
might be translated "the luster of true
instruction."
from this period (writes a historian) ships
began to pass and re-pass in tranquillity. all
became quiet on the rivers and tranquil on the
four seas. people lived in peace and plenty.
men sold their arms and bought oxen to plough
their fields. they buried sacrifices, said
prayers on the tops of hills, and rejoiced 
themselves by singing behind screens during
the day-time.*
monk eastman, purveyor of iniquities
the toughs of one america
whether profiled against a backdrop of bluepainted
walls or of the sky it-self, two toughs
sheathed in grave black clothing dance, in boots
with high-stacked heels, a solemn dance—the
tango of evenly matched knives—until
suddenly, a carnation drops from behind an
ear, for a knife has plunged into a man, whose
horizontal dying brings the dance without
music to its end. resigned,* the other man
adjusts his hat and devotes the years of his old
age to telling the story of that clean-fought duel.
that, to the least and last de-tail, is the story of
the argentine underworld. the story of the
thugs and ruffians of new york has much more
speed, and much less grace.
the toughs of another
the story of the new york gangs (told in
1928 by herbert asbury in a decorous volume
of some four hundred octavo pages) possesses
all the confusion and cruelty of barbarian
cosmologies, and much of their gigantism and
ineptitude. the chaotic story takes place in the
cellars of old breweries turned into negro
tenements, in a seedy, three-story new york
city filled with gangs of thugs like the swamp
angels, who would swarm out of labyrinthine
sewers on marauding expeditions; gangs of
cutthroats like the daybreak boys, who
recruited precocious murderers often and
eleven years old; brazen, solitary giants like the
plug uglies, whose stiff bowler hats stuffed with
wool and whose vast shirttails blowing in the
wind of the slums might provoke a passerby's
improbable smile, but who carried huge
bludgeons in their right hands and long, narrow
pistols; and gangs of streettoughs like the dead
rabbit gang, who entered into battle under the
banner of their mascot impaled upon a pike. its
characters were men like dandy johnny dolan,
famed for his brilliantined forelock, the
monkey-headed walking sticks he carried, and
the delicate copper pick he wore on his thumb
to gouge out his enemies' eyes; men like kit
burns, who was known to bite the head off live
rats; and men like blind danny lyons, a
towheaded kid with huge dead eyes who
pimped for three whores that proudly walked
the streets for him. there were rows of red-light
houses, such as those run by the seven new
england sisters that gave all the profits from
their christmas eves to charity; rat fights and
dog fights; chinese gambling dens; women like
the oft-widowed red norah, who was squired
about and loved by every leader of the famous
gophers, or lizzy the dove, who put on black
when danny lyons was murdered and got her
throat cut for it by gentle maggie, who took
exception to lizzy's old affair with the dead
blind man; riots such as that of the savage week
of 1863 when a hundred buildings were burned
to the ground and the entire city was lucky to
escape the flames; street brawls when a man
would be as lost as if he'd drowned, for he'd be
stomped to death; and thieves and horse
poisoners like yoske nigger. the most famous
hero of the story of the new york city
underworld is edward delaney, alias william
delaney, alias joseph marvin, alias joseph
morris— alias monk eastman, the leader of a
gang of twelve hundred men.
the hero
those shifting "dodges" (as tedious as a game
of masks in which one can never be certain who
is who) fail to include the man's true name—if
we al-low ourselves to believe that there is such
a thing as "a man's true name." the fact is, the
name given in the records division of the
williamsburg section of brooklyn is edward
ostermann, later americanized to eastman.
odd—this brawling and tempestuous hoodlum
was jewish. he was the son of the owner of a
restaurant that billed itself as kosher, where
men with rabbinical beards might trustingly
consume the bled and thrice-clean meat of
calves whose throats had been slit with
righteousness. with his father's backing, in
1892, at the age of nineteen, he opened a pet
shop specializing in birds. observing the life of
animals, studying their small decisions, their
inscrutable innocence, was a passion that
accompanied monk eastman to the end. in
later times of magnificence, when he scorned
the cigars of the freckled sachems of tammany
hall and pulled up to the finest whorehouses in
one of new york's first automobiles (a machine
that looked like the by-blow of a venetian
gondola), he opened a second establishment,
this one a front, that was home to a hundred
purebred cats and more than four hundred
pigeons—none of which were for sale at any
price. he loved every one of the creatures, and
would often stroll through the streets of the
neighbor-hood with one purring cat on his arm
and others trailing along ambitiously in his
wake.
he was a battered and monumental man. he
had a short, bull neck, an unassailable chest,
the long arms of a boxer, a broken nose; his
face, though legended with scars, was less
imposing than his body. he was bowlegged, like
a jockey or a sailor. he might go shirtless or
collarless, and often went without a coat, but he
was never seen without a narrow-brimmed
derby atop his enormous head. he is still
remembered. physically, the conventional
gunman of the moving pictures is modeled after
him, not the flabby and epicene capone. it has
been said that louis wolheim was used in
hollywood films because his features reminded
people of the deplorable monk eastman....
eastman would leave his house to inspect his
gangster empire with a blue-feathered pigeon
perched on his shoulder, like a bull with a heron
on its hump.
in 1894 there were many dance halls in new
york city; eastman was a bouncer in one of
them.
legend has it that the manager wouldn't talk
to him about the job, so monk showed his
qualifications by roundly demolishing the two
gorillas that stood in the way of his
employment. he held the job until 1899—
feared, and single-handed.
for every obstreperous customer he
subdued, he would cut a notch in the bludgeon 
he carried. one night, a shining bald spot
leaning over a beer caught his eye, and eastman
laid the man's scalp open with a tremendous
blow. "i had forty-nine nicks in me stick, an' i
wanted to make it an even fifty!" eastman later
explained.
ruling the roost
from 1899 onward, eastman was not just
famous, he was the ward boss of an important
electoral district in the city, and he collected
large payoffs from the red-light houses, stuss
games, streetwalkers, pickpockets, loft burglars,
and footpads of that sordid fiefdom. the party
would contract him when some mischief needed
doing, and private individuals would come to
him too. these are the fees he would charge for
a job:
ear chawed off............. .............................$ 15.
leg broke........................................................19.
shot in leg.......................................................25.
stab.................................................................25.
doing the big job...............................100. and up 
sometimes, to keep his hand in, eastman
would do the job personally.
a territorial dispute as subtle and ill
humored as those forestalled by international
law brought him up against paul kelly, the
famous leader of another gang. the boundary
line had been established by bullets and border
patrol skirmishes. eastman crossed the line late
one night and was set upon by five of kelly's
men. with his blackjack and those lightningquick
simian arms of his, he managed to knock
down three of them, but he was shot twice in
the stomach and left for dead. he stuck his
thumb and fore-finger in the hot wounds and
staggered to the hospital. life, high fever, and
death contended over monk eastman for
several weeks, but his lips would not divulge the
names of his assailants. by the time he left the
hospital, the war was in full swing. there was
one shoot-out after another, and this went on
for two years, until the i9th of august, 1903.
the battle of rivington street
a hundred or more heroes, none quite
resembling the mug shot probably fading at
that very moment in the mug books; a hundred
heroes reeking of cigar smoke and alcohol; a
hundred heroes in straw boaters with brightcolored
bands; a hundred heroes, all suffering
to a greater or lesser degree from shameful
diseases, tooth decay, respiratory ailments, or
problems with their kidneys; a hundred heroes
as insignificant or splendid as those of troy or
junin *—those were the men that fought that
black deed of arms in the shadow of the
elevated train. the cause of it was a raid that
kelly's "en-forcers" had made on a stuss game
under monk eastman's protection. one of
kelly's men was killed, and the subsequent
shoot-out grew into a battle of uncountable
revolvers. from behind the tall pillars of the el,
silent men with clean-shaven chins blazed away
at one another; soon, they were the center of a
horrified circle of hired hacks carrying
impatient reinforcements clutching colt
artillery. what were the protagonists in the
battle feeling? 
first, i believe, the brutal conviction that the
senseless, deafening noise of a hundred
revolvers was going to annihilate them
instantly; second, i believe, the no less
erroneous certainty that if the initial volley
didn't get them, they were invulnerable.
speculation notwithstanding, behind their
parapets of iron and the night, they battled
furiously. twice the police tried to intervene,
and twice they were repelled. at the first light of
dawn, the battle died away, as though it were
spectral, or obscene. under the tall arches
raised by engineers, what remained were seven
men gravely wounded, four men dead, and one
lifeless pigeon.
the crackle of gunfire
the ward politicians for whom monk
eastman worked had always publicly denied
that such gangs existed, or had clarified that
they were merely social clubs. the indiscreet
battle on rivington street alarmed them. they
called in eastman and kelly and impressed
upon them the need to declare a truce. 
kelly, who recognized that politicians were
better than all the colts ever made when it came
to dissuading the police from their duty,
immediately saw the light; eastman, with the
arrogance of his great stupid body, was spoiling
for more grudge fights and more bullets. at
first, he wouldn't hear of a truce, but the
politicos threatened him with prison. finally
the two illustrious thugs were brought together
in a downtown dive; each man had a cigar
clenched in his teeth, his right hand on his gun,
and his watchful swarm of armed bodyguards
hovering nearby. they came to a very american
sort of decision—they would let the dispute be
settled by a boxing match. kelly was a skilled
boxer. the match took place in an old barn, and
it was stranger than fiction. one hundred forty
spectators watched—toughs in cocked derby
hats and women in "mikado tuck-ups," the
high-piled, delicate hairdos of the day. the fight
lasted two hours, and it ended in utter
exhaustion. within a week, gunshots were
crackling again. monk was arrested, for the
umpteenth time. the police, relieved, derived
great amusement from his arrest; the judge
prophesied for him, quite correctly, ten years in
prison.
eastman vs. germany
when the still-perplexed monk eastman got
out of sing sing, the twelve hundred toughs in
his gang had scattered. he couldn't manage to
round them up again, so he resigned himself to
working on his own.
on the 8th of september, 1917, he was
arrested for fighting and charged with
disturbing the peace. on the 9th, he felt like he
needed another sort of fight, and he enlisted in
the army.
we know several details of his service. we
know that he was fervently opposed to the
taking of prisoners, and that once (with just his
rifle butt) he prevented that deplorable practice.
we know that once he escaped from the
hospital and made his way back to the trenches.
we know that he distinguished himself in the
conflicts near montfaucon. we know that
afterward he was heard to say that in his
opinion there were lots of dance halls in the
bowery that were tougher than that so-called
"great war" of theirs.
the mysterious, logical end
on the 25th of december, 1920, monk
eastman's body was found on one of new
york's downtown streets. he had been shot five
times. a common alley cat, blissfully ignorant of
death, was pacing, a bit perplexedly, about the
body.*
the disinterested killer bill harrigan
the image of the lands of arizona, before any
other image—arizona and new mexico. a
landscape dazzlingly underlain with gold and
silver, a wind-blown, dizzying landscape of
monumental mesas and delicate colorations,
with the white glare of a skeleton stripped bare
by hawks and buzzards. within this landscape,
another image—the image of billy the kid, the 
rider sitting firm upon his horse, the young man
of loud shots that stun the desert, the shooter of
invisible bullets that kill at a distance, like a
magic spell.
the arid, glaring desert veined with
minerals. the almost-child who died at the age
of twenty-one owing a debt to human justice for
the deaths of twenty-one men—"not counting
mexicans."
the larval state
in 1859, the man who in terror and glory
would be known as billy the kid was born in a
basement lodging in new york city. they say it
was a worn-out irish womb that bore him, but
that he was brought up among negroes. in that
chaos of kinky hair and rank sweat, he enjoyed
the primacy lent by freckles and a shock of
auburn hair. he practiced the arrogance of
being white; he was also scrawny, quicktempered,
and foulmouthed. by the age of
twelve he was one of the swamp angels, a gang
of deities whose lair was the sewers of the city.
on nights that smelled of burned fog they
would swarm out of that fetid labyrinth, follow
the trail of some german sailor, bring him
down with a blow to his head, strip him of all he
owned, even his underwear, and return once
more to that other scum. they were under the
command of a white-haired negro named
jonas, a member of the gas house gang and a
man famed as a poisoner of horses.
sometimes, from the garret window of some
hunchbacked house near the water, a woman
would dump a bucket of ashes onto the head of
a passerby. as he gasped and choked, the
swamp angels would descend upon him, drag
him down the basement steps, and pillage him.
such were the years of apprenticeship of bill
harrigan, the future billy the kid. he felt no
scorn for theatrical fictions: he liked to go to the
theater (perhaps with no presentiment that they
were the symbols and letters of his own destiny)
to see the cowboy shows.
go west!
if the packed theater houses of the bowery
(whose audiences would yell "h'ist dat rag!"
when the curtain failed to rise promptly at the
scheduled time) presented so many of those
gallop-and-shoot "horse operas," the reason is
that america was experiencing a fascination
with the west. beyond the setting sun lay the
gold of nevada and california. beyond the
setting sun lay the cedar-felling ax, the buffalo's
huge babylonian face, brigham young's top hat
and populous marriage bed, the red man's
ceremonies and his wrath, the clear desert air,
the wild prairie, the elemental earth whose
nearness made the heart beat faster, like the
nearness of the sea. the west was beckoning. a
constant, rhythmic murmur filled those years:
the sound of thousands of americans settling
the west. that procession, in the year 1872, was
joined by the always coiled and ready to strike*
bill harrigan, fleeing a rectangular cell.
a mexican felled
history (which, like a certain motion-picture
director, tells its story in discontinuous images)
now offers us the image of a hazardous bar set
in the midst of the all-powerful desert as though 
in the midst of the sea. the time—one
changeable night in the year 1873; the exact
place—somewhere on the llano estacado, in
new mexico. the land is almost preternaturally
flat, but the sky of banked clouds, with tatters of
storm and moon, is covered with dry, cracked
watering holes and mountains. on the ground,
there are a cow skull, the howls and eyes of a
coyote in the darkness, fine horses, and the long
shaft of light from the bar. inside, their elbows
on the bar, tired, hard-muscled men drink a
belligerent alcohol and flash stacks of silver
coins marked with a serpent and an eagle. a
drunk sings impassively.
some of the men speak a language with
many s's —it must be spanish, since those who
speak it are held in contempt by the others. bill
harrigan, the red-haired tenement house rat, is
among the drinkers. he has downed a couple of
shots and is debating (perhaps because he's flat
broke) whether to call for another.
the men of this desert land baffle him. to
him they look huge and terrifying, tempestuous,
happy, hatefully knowledgeable in their
handling of wild cattle and big horses. suddenly
there is absolute silence, ignored only by the
tin-eared singing of the drunk. a brawny,
powerful-looking giant of a mexican with the
face of an old indian woman has come into the
bar. his enormous sombrero and the two
pistols on his belt make him seem even larger
than he is. in a harsh english he wishes all the
gringo sons of bitches drinking in the placea
buenas noches. no one takes up the gauntlet.
bill asks who the mexican is, and someone
whispers fearfully that the dago (diego) is
belisario villagrán, from chihuahua. instantly,
a shot rings out. shielded by the ring of tall men
around him, bill has shot the intruder. the
glass falls from villagran's hand; then, the
entire man follows. there is no need for a
second shot. without another look at the
sumptuous dead man, bill picks up the
conversation where he left off.
"is that so?" he drawled. "well, i'm bill
harrigan, from new york."
the drunk, insignificant, keeps singing.
the sequel is not hard to foresee. bill shakes 
hands all around and accepts flattery, cheers,
and whisky.
someone notices that there are no notches
on billy's gun, and offers to cut one to mark the
killing of villagrán. billy the kid keeps that
someone's knife, but mutters that "mexicans
ain't worth makin' notches for." but perhaps
that is not enough. that night billy lays his
blanket out next to the dead man and sleeps—
ostentatiously—until morning.
killing for the hell of it
out of the happy report of that gunshot (at
fourteen years of age) the hero billy the kid was
born and the shifty bill harrigan buried. the
scrawny kid of the sewers and skullcracking had
risen to the rank of frontiersman. he became a
horseman; he learned to sit a horse straight, the
way they did in texas or wyoming, not leaning
back like they did in oregon and california. he
never fully measured up to the legend of
himself, but he came closer and closer as time
went on. something of the new york hoodlum
lived on in the cowboy; he bestowed upon the
mexicans the hatred once inspired in him by
negroes, but the last words he spoke (a string of
curses) were in spanish. he learned the
vagabond art of cattle driving and the other,
more difficult art of driving men; both helped
him be a good cattle rustler.
sometimes, the guitars and brothels of
mexico reached out and pulled him in. with the
dreadful lucidity of insomnia, he would
organize orgies that went on for four days and
four nights. finally, in revulsion, he would pay
the bill in bullets. so long as his trigger finger
didn't fail him, he was the most feared (and
perhaps most empty and most lonely) man on
that frontier. pat garrett, his friend, the sheriff
who finally killed him, once remarked: "i've
practiced my aim a good deal killing buffalo."
"i've practiced mine more'n you have, killing
men," billy softly replied. the details are lost
forever, but we know that he was responsible
for as many as twenty-one killings—"not
counting mexicans." for seven daring and
dangerous years he indulged himself in that
luxury called anger. 
on the night of july 25,1880, billy the kid
came galloping down the main (or only) street
of fort sumner on his pinto. the heat was
oppressive, and the lamps were not yet lighted;
sheriff garrett, sitting on the porch in a rocking
chair, pulled out his gun and shot billy in the
stomach. the horse went on; the rider toppled
into the dirt street. garrett put a second bullet
in him. the town (knowing the wounded man
was billy the kid) closed and locked its
windows. billy's dying was long and
blasphemous. when the sun was high, the
townspeople began to approach, and someone
took his gun; the man was dead.
they noted in him that unimportant sort of
look that dead men generally have.
he was shaved, sewn into tailor-made
clothes, and exhibited to horror and mockery in
the shopwindow of the town's best store.
men on horses or in gigs came in from miles
around. on the third day, they had to put
makeup on him.
on the fourth, to great jubilation, he was
buried. 
the uncivil teacher of court etiquette:
kôtsukéno suké
the iniquitous protagonist of this chapter is
the uncivil courtier kira kôtsukéno suké, the
fateful personage who brought about the
degradation and death of the lord of the castle
of ako yet refused to take his own life,
honorably, when fitting vengeance so
demanded. he was a man who merits the
gratitude of all men, for he awakened priceless
loyalties and provided the black yet necessary
occasion for an immortal undertaking. a
hundred or more novels, scholarly articles,
doctoral theses, and operas—not to mention
effusions in porcelain, veined lapis lazuli, and
lacquer—commemorate the deed. even that
most versatile of media, celluloid, has served to
preserve the exploit, for "chushingura, or the
doctrinal history of the forty-seven loyal
retainers" (such is the title of the film) is the
most oft-presented inspiration of japanese
filmmaking. the minutely detailed glory which
those ardent tributes attest is more than
justifiable—it is immediately just, in anyone's
view.
i follow the story as told by a. b. mitford,
who omits those continual distractions lent by
"local color," preferring instead to focus on the
movement of the glorious episode. that
admirable lack of
"orientalism" allows one to suspect that he
has taken his version directly from the
japanese.
the untied ribbon
in the now faded spring of 1702, asano
takumino kami, the illustrious lord of the
castle of ako, was obliged to receive an envoy
from the emperor and offer the hospitality and
entertainment of his home to him. two
thousand three hundred years of courtesy
(some mythological) had brought the rituals of
reception to a fine point of anguished
complication. the ambassador represented the 
emperor, but did so by way of allusion, or
symbolically—and this was a nuance which one
emphasized too greatly or too little only at one's
peril. in order to avoid errors which might all
too easily prove fatal, an official of the court at
yedo was sent beforehand to teach the proper
ceremonies to be observed. far from the
comforts of the court, and sentenced to this
backwoods villégiature (which to him must
have seemed more like a banishment than a
holiday), kira kôtsukéno suké imparted his
instructions most ungraciously.
at times the magisterial tone of his voice
bordered on the insolent. his student, the lord
of the castle of ako, affected to ignore these
affronts; he could find no suitable reply, and
discipline forbade the slightest violence. one
morning, however, the ribbon on the courtier's
sock came untied, and he requested that the
lord of the castle of ako tie it up for him again.
this gentleman did so, humbly yet with inward
indignation. the uncivil teacher of court
etiquette told him that he was truly
incorrigible—only an ill-bred country bumpkin 
was capable of tying a knot as clumsily as that.
at these words, the lord of the castle of ako
drew his sword and slashed at the uncivil
courtier, who fled—the graceful flourish of a
delicate thread of blood upon his forehead…
a few days later, the military court handed
down its sentence against the attacker: the lord
of the castle of ako was to be allowed to commit
hará kiri. in the central courtyard of the castle
of ako, a dais was erected and covered in red
felt, and to it the condemned man was led; he
was given a short knife of gold and gems, he
confessed his crime publicly, he allowed his
upper garments to slip down to his girdle so
that he was naked to the waist, and he cut open
his abdomen with the two ritual movements of
the dirk. he died like a samurai; the more
distant spectators saw no blood, for the felt was
red. a white-haired man of great attention to
detail—the councillor oishi kuranosuké,his
second—decapitated his lord with a saber.
the feigner of iniquities
takumi no kami's castle was confiscated, his 
family ruined and eclipsed, his name linked to
execration.
his retainers became rônins. *one rumor
has it that the same night the lord committed
hará kiri, forty-seven of these rônins met on
the summit of a mountain, where in minute
detail they planned the act that took place one
year later. but the fact is that the retainers acted
with well-justified delay, and at least one of
their confabulations took place not on the
difficult peak of a mountain, but in a chapel in a
forest, an undistinguished pavilion of whitepainted
wood, unadorned save for the
rectangular box that held a mirror.
the rônins hungered for revenge, but
revenge must have seemed unattainable. kira
kôtsukéno suké, the hated teacher of court
etiquette, had fortified his house, and a cloud of
archers and swordsmen swarmed about his
palanquin. among his retinue were
incorruptible, secret spies upon whom no detail
was lost, and no man did they so closely spy
upon and follow as the councilor kuranosuké,
the presumed leader of the avenging rônins. 
but by chance kuranosuké discovered the
surveillance, and he based his plan for
vengeance upon that knowledge.
he moved to kioto, a city unparalleled
throughout the empire for the color of its
autumns. he allowed himself to descend into
the depths of brothels, gambling dens, and
taverns. in spite of the gray hairs of his head, he
consorted with prostitutes and poets, and with
persons even worse. once he was expelled from
a tavern and woke up to find himself in the
street, his head covered with vomit.
it happened that a satsuma man saw this,
and said, sadly yet with anger, "is not this oishi
kuranosuké,who was a councilor to asano
takumino kami, and who helped him to die yet
not having the heart to avenge his lord, gives
himself up to women and wine? faithless beast!
fool and craven!
unworthy the name of a samurai!"
and he trod on kuranosuké's face as he slept,
and spat on him. whenkôtsukénosuké'sspies
reported this passivity, the courtier felt much
relieved. 
but things did not stop there. the councilor
sent his wife and two younger children away
and bought a concubine; this iniquitous act
cheered the heart and relaxed the fearful
prudence of his enemy, who at last dismissed
half his guards.
on one of the bitter nights of the winter of
1703, the forty-seven rônins met in an
unkempt garden on the outskirts of yedo, near
a bridge and the playing card factory. they
carried the pennants and banners of their lord.
before they began the assault, they informed
the inhabitants of the city that they were not
raiding the town but embarking on a military
mission of strict justice.
the scar
two groups attacked the palace of kira
kôtsukéno suké. the councillor kuranosuké led
the first, which assaulted the main gate; the
second was led by the councillor's elder son,
who was not yet sixteen years old and who died
that night. history records the many moments
of that extraordinarily lucid nightmare—the 
perilous, pendular descent of the rope ladders,
the drum beating the signal of attack, the
defenders'
rush to defend, the archers posted on the
rooftops, the unswerving path of the arrows
toward vital organs, the porcelains dishonored
by blood, the burning death that turns to ice—
all the brazen and disorderly elements of death.
nine of therôninsdied; the defenders were no
less brave, and they would not surrender.
shortly after midnight, all resistance ended.
kira kôtsukéno suké, the ignominious cause
of all that loyalty, was nowhere to be found. the
attackers sought him through every corner of
the emotion-torn palace; they were beginning to
despair of finding him, when the councillor
noted that his bedclothes were still warm. again
the rônins searched, and soon they discovered
a narrow window, hidden by a bronze mirror.
below, in a gloomy courtyard, a man in white
looked up at them; a trembling sword was in his
right hand. when they rushed down, the man
gave himself up without a fight. his forehead
bore a scar—the old rubric left by takumi no
kami's blade.
then the bloody rônins went down on their
knees to the detested nobleman and told him
that they were the former retainers of the lord
of the castle of ako, for whose death and
perdition he was to blame, and they requested
that he commit the suicide that befitted a
samurai.
in vain did the retainers propose to the lord's
servile spirit that act of self-respect. he was a
man impervious to the pleas of honor; at
sunrise, the officers had to slit his throat.
the evidence
their thirst for revenge now quenched (but
without wrath, or agitation, or regret), the
rônins made their way toward the temple that
sheltered the remains of their lord.
in a brass pail they carried the incredible
head of kirakôtsukéno suké, and they took
turns watching over it. they crossed fields and
provinces, in the honest light of day. men
blessed them and wept. the prince of sendai
offered them his hospitality, but they replied
that their lord had been waiting for them for
almost two years. at last they reached the dark
sepulcher, and they offered up the head of their
enemy.
the supreme court handed down its verdict,
and it was as expected: the retainers were
granted the privilege of suicide. all obeyed,
some with are-dent serenity, and they lie now
beside their lord. today, men and children
come to the sepulcher of those faithful men to
pray.
the satsuma man
among the pilgrims who come to the grave,
there is one dusty, tired young man who must
have come from a great distance. he prostrates
himself before the monument to the councillor
oishi kuranosuké and he says aloud: "when i
saw you lying drunk by the roadside, at the
doorstep of a whorehouse in kioto, i knew not
that you were plotting to avenge your lord; and,
thinking you to be a faithless man, i trampled
on you and spat in your face as i passed. i have
come to offer atonement." he spoke these
words and then committed hará kiri.
the priest of the temple where kuranosuké's
body lay was greatly moved by the satsuma
man's courage, and he buried him by the side of
therôninsand their lord.
this is the end of the story of the forty-seven
loyal retainers—except that the story has no
ending, because we other men, who are perhaps
not loyal yet will never entirely lose the hope
that we might one day be so, shall continue to
honor them with our words.*
hakim, the masked dyer of merv
for angélica ocampo
unless i am mistaken, the original sources of
information on al-moqanna, the veiled (or,
more strictly, masked) prophet of khorasan,
are but four: (a) the excerpts from the history
of the caliphs preserved by bãladhun; (b)the
manual of the giant, or book of precision and
revision, by the official historian of the
abbasids, ibn abï tahfr tarfur; (c) the arabic
codex entitled the annihilation of the rose,
which refutes the abominable heresies of the
rosa obscura or rosa secreta, which was the
prophet's holy work; and (d) several coins
(without portraits) unearthed by an engineer
named andrusov on ground that had been
leveled for the trans-caspian railway. these
coins were deposited in the numismatic
museum in tehran; they contain persian
distichs which summarize or correct certain
passages from the annihilation.
the original rosa has apparently been lost,
since the manuscript found in 1899 and
published (not without haste) by the
morgenländisches archiv was declared by
horn, and later by sir percy sykes, to be
apocryphal.
the fame of the prophet in the west is owed
to thomas moore's garrulous poem lolla
rookh, a work laden with the irish
conspirator's sighs and longings for the east.
the scarlet dye
in the year 120 of the hegira, or 736 of the
christian era, there was born in turkestan the
man hakim, whom the people of that time and
that region were to call the veiled. his
birthplace was the ancient city of merv, whose
gardens and vineyards and lawns look out sadly
onto the desert. noontime there, when not
obscured by choking clouds of sand that leave a
film of whitish dust on the black clusters of the
grapes, is white and dazzling.
hakim was raised in that wearied city. we
know that one of his father's brothers trained
him as a dyer—the craft, known to be a refuge
for infidels and impostors and inconstant men,
which inspired the first anathemas of his
extravagant career. my face is of gold, a
famous page of the annihilation says, but i
have steeped the purple dye and on the second
night have plunged the un-carded wool into it,
and on the third night have saturated the
prepared wool, and the emperors of the islands
still contend for that bloody cloth. thus did i
sin in the years of my youth, deforming the
true colors of the creatures. the angel would 
tell me that lambs were not the color of tigers,
while satan would say to me that the allpowerful
one desired that they be, and in that
pursuit he employed my cunning and my dye.
now i know that neither the angel nor satan
spoke the truth, for i know that aücoloris
abominable.
in the year 146 of the hegira, hakim
disappeared from his native city. the vats and
barrels in which he had immersed the cloth
were broken, as were a scimitar from shiraz and
a brass mirror.
the bull
at the end of the moon of sha'ban in the year
158, the air of the desert was very clear, and a
group of men were looking toward the west in
expectation of the moon of ramadan, which
inspires fasting and mortification. they were
slaves, beggars, horse sellers, camel thieves, and
butchers. sitting gravely on the ground before
the gate of an inn at which caravans stopped on
the road to merv, they awaited the sign. they
looked at the setting sun, and the color of the 
setting sun was the color of the sand.
from far out on the dizzying desert (whose
sun gives men fever and whose moon brings on
convulsions), they saw three figures, apparently
of immense height, coming toward them. the
three figures were human, but the one in the
center possessed the head of a bull. as these
figures came closer, the man in the center was
seen to be wearing a mask, while the two men
that accompanied him were blind.
someone (as in the tales of the thousand
and one nights) asked the reason for this
wonder. they are blind, the masked man said,
because they have looked upon my face.
the leopard
the historian of the abbasids relates that the
man from the desert (whose voice was
extraordinarily sweet, or so, in contrast to the
harshness of the mask, it seemed to be) told the
men that though they were awaiting the sign of
a month of penitence, he would be for them a
greater sign: the sign of an entire life of
penitence, and a calumniated death. he told
them that he was hakim, son of ozman, and
that in the year 146 of the flight a man had
entered his house and after purifying himself
and praying had cut his, hakim's, head off with
a scimitar and taken it up to the heavens. borne
in the right hand of this visitor (who was the
angel gabriel), his head had been taken before
the almighty, who had bade him prophesy,
entrusting him with words of such antiquity
that speaking them burned one's mouth and
endowed one with such glorious resplendence
that mortal eyes could not bear to look upon it.
that was the reason for his mask. when every
man on earth professed the new law, the visage
would be unveiled to them, and they would be
able to worship it without danger—as the angels
did already. his message delivered, hakim
exhorted the men to jihad —a holy war—and
the martyrdom that accompanied it.
the slaves, beggars, horse sellers, camel
thieves, and butchers denied him their belief—
one voice cried sorcerer, another, impostor.
someone had brought a leopard—perhaps a
member of that lithe and bloodthirsty breed
trained by persian huntsmen. at any rate, it
broke free of its cage. save for the masked
prophet and his two acolytes, all the men there
trampled one another in their haste to flee.
when they returned, the beast was blind. in the
presence of those luminous, dead eyes, the men
worshiped hakim and admitted his
supernatural estate.
the veiled prophet
the official historian of the abbasids
narrates with no great enthusiasm the inroads
made by hakim the veiled in khorasan. that
province—greatly moved by the misfortune and
crucifixion of its most famous leader—
embraced with desperate fervor the doctrine
offered by the shining visage and offered up to
him its blood and gold. (hakim by now had
exchanged his harsh mask for a fourfold veil of
white silk embroidered with precious stones.
black was the symbolic color of the caliphs of
the house of abbas; hakim chose the color
white—the most distant from it—for his
shielding veil, his banners, and his turbans.)
the campaign began well. it is true that in the
book of precision it is the caliph's pennants
that are victorious everywhere, but since the
most frequent result of those victories is the
stripping of the generals of their rank and the
abandonment of impregnable castles, it is not
difficult for the sagacious reader to read
between the lines. toward the end of the moon
of rajab in the year 161, the famous city of
nishapur opened its iron gates to the masked
one; in early 162, the city of astarabad did
likewise.
hakim's military operations (like those of
another, more fortunate prophet) were limited
to his tenor chanting of prayers offered up to
the deity from the hump of a reddish-colored
camel in the chaotic heart of battle. arrows
would whistle all around him, yet he was never
wounded. he seemed to seek out danger—the
night a band of loathsome lepers surrounded
his palace, he had them brought to him, he
kissed them, and he made them gifts of gold
and silver. 
the prophet delegated the wearying details
of governing to six or seven adepts. he was a
scholar of meditation and of peace—a harem of
114 blind wives attempted to satisfy the needs of
his divine body.
abominable mirrors
so long as their words do not altogether
contravene orthodox belief, confidential friends
of god are tolerated by islam, however
indiscreet or threatening to that religion they
may be. the prophet would perhaps not have
spurned the advantages of that neglect, but his
followers, his victories, and the public wrath of
the caliph—whose name was muhammadalmahdï—
forced him into heresy. it was that
dissent that ruined him, though first it led him
to set down the articles of a personal religion (a
personal religion that bore the clear influence of
gnostic forebears).
in the beginning of hakim's cosmogony
there was a spectral god, a deity as majestically
devoid of origins as of name and face. this deity
was an immutable god, but its image threw nine 
shadows; these, condescending to action,
endowed and ruled over a first heaven. from
that first demiurgic crown there came a second,
with its own angels, powers, and thrones, and
these in turn founded another, lower heaven,
which was the symmetrical duplicate of the
first. this second conclave was reproduced in a
third, and the third in another, lower conclave,
and so on, to the number of 999. the lord of the
nethermost heaven—the shadow of shadows of
yet other shadows—is he who reigns over us,
and his fraction of divinity tends to zero.
the earth we inhabit is an error, an
incompetent parody. mirrors and paternity are
abominable because they multiply and affirm it.
revulsion, disgust, is the fundamental virtue,
and two rules of conduct (between which the
prophet left men free to choose) lead us to it:
abstinence and utter licentiousness—the
indulgence of the flesh or the chastening of it.
hakim's paradise and hell were no less
desperate. to those who deny the word, to
those who deny the jeweled veil and the
visage, runs an imprecation from the rosa 
secreta, i vow a wondrous hell, for each
person who so denies shall reign over 999
empires of fire, and in each empire shall be 999
mountains of fire, and upon each mountain
there shall be 999 towers of fire, and each
tower shall have 999 stories of fire, and each
story shall have 999 beds of fire, and in each
bed shall that person be, and 999 kinds of fire,
each with its own face and voice, shall torture
that person throughout eternity. another
passage corroborates this: here, in this life,
dost thou suffer one body; in death and
retribution, thou shalt have bodies
innumerable. paradise was less concrete: it is
always night, and there are fountains of stone,
and the happiness of that paradise is the
special happiness of farewells, of renunciation,
and of those who know that they are sleeping.
the visage
in the 163rd year of the hegira, the fifth of
the shining face, hakim was surrounded in
sanamby the caliph's army. great were the
provisions, many the martyrs, and aid from a
horde of angels of light was expected at any
moment. such was the pass to which they had
come when a terrifying rumor spread through
the castle. it was said that as an adulteress
within the harem was being strangled by the
eunuchs, she had screamed that the third finger
was missing from the prophet's right hand, and
that his other fingers had no nails. the rumor
spread like fire among the faithful. in broad
daylight, standing upon a high terrace, hakim
prayed to his familiar god for victory, or for a
sign. servilely, with their heads bowed (as
though they were running against the rain), two
captains snatched away the gem-embroidered
veil.
first, there came a trembling. the promised
face of the apostle, the face which had
journeyed to the heavens, was indeed white, but
it was white with the whiteness of leprosy. it
was so swollen (or so incredible) that it seemed
to be a mask. it had no eyebrows; the lower
eyelid of the right eye drooped upon the senile
cheek; a dangling cluster of nodular growths
was eating away its lips; the flat and inhuman
nose resembled that of a lion.
hakim's voice attempted one final deception:
thy abominable sins forbid thee to look upon
my radiance..., he began.
no one was listening; he was riddled with
spears.
man on pink corner*
for enrique amorim
imagine you bringing up francisco real that
way, out of the clear blue sky, him dead and
gone and all.
because i met the man, even if this wa'n't
exactly his stomping ground—his was more up
in the north, up around guadalupe lake and
batería. truth is, i doubt if i crossed paths with
the man more than three times, and all three
were on a single night—though it's not one i'll
be likely ever to forget. it was the night la
lujanera came home to sleep at my place—just
like that, just up and came—and the same night
rosendo juárez left maldonado* never to
return. of course you probably haven't had the
experience you'd need to recognize that
particular individual's name, but in his time
rosendo juárez—the sticker, they called him—
was one of the toughest customers in villa
santa rita. he was fierce with a knife, was
rosendo juárez, as you'd expect with a moniker
like that, and he was one of don nicolás
paredes' men—don nicolás being one of morel's
men.* he'd come into the cathouse just as
dandified as you can imagine, head to foot in
black, with his belt buckle and studs and all of
silver. men and dogs, both, had a healthy
respect for him, and the whores did too;
everybody knew two killings'd been laid to him
already. he wore a tall sort of hat with a narrow
brim, which sat down like this on a long mane
of greasy hair. rosendo was favored by fortune,
as they say, and we boys in the neighborhood
would imitate him right down to the way he
spit. but then there came a night that showed
us rosendo juarez's true colors.
it's hard to believe, but the story of that
night—a night as strange as any i've ever lived
through—began with an insolent red-wheeled
hack crammed with men, banging and rattling
along those streets of hard-packed clay, past
brick kilns and vacant lots. there was two men
in black, strumming guitars and lost in their
own thoughts, and the man on the driver's seat
using his whip on any loose dogs that took a
mind to mess with the piebald in the traces, and
one fellow wrapped tight in a poncho riding in
the middle
—which was the yard master that everybody
always talked about, and he was spoiling for a
fight, spoiling for a kill. the night was so cool it
was like a blessing from heaven; two of these
fellows were riding up on the folded-back cloth
top of the hack—and it was as though the
loneliness made that rattletrap a veritable
parade. that was the first event of the many
that took place, but it wa'n't till a while
afterward that we found out this part. me and
my friends, meantime, we'd been over at julia's
place since early that evening, julia's place
being a big old barracks-like building made out 
of sheets of zinc, between the gauna road and
the maldonado. it was a place you could pick
out from quite a distance off, on account of the
light from a brazen big red light—and on
account of the hullabaloo too. this julia,
although she was a colored woman, was as
reliable and honest as you could ask for, so
there wa'n't ever any lack of musicians, good
drinks, and girls that could dance all night if
they was asked to. but this lujanera i
mentioned, who was rosendo's woman, she
outdid 'em all, and by a good long ways. la
lujanera's dead now, señor, and i have to admit
that sometimes whole years go by that i don't
think about her, but you ought to have seen her
in her time, with those eyes of hers. seeing' her
wouldn't put a man to sleep, and that's for sure.
rotgut, milongas, women, a simpático kind
of curse at you from the mouth of rosendo
juárez, a slap on the back from him that you
tried to feel was friendly-like—the truth is, i was
as happy as a man could be. i was paired up
with a girl that could follow like she could read
my mind; the tango was having its way with us, 
whirling us this way and then that and losing us
and calling us back again and finding us.... to
make a long story short, we boys were dancing,
'most like bein' in a dream, when all of a sudden
the music seemed to get louder, and what it was
was that you could begin to hear the guitarstrumming
of those two fellows i mentioned,
mixing in with the music there at julia's, and
coming nearer every minute.
then the gust of wind that had brought it to
us changed direction, and i went back to my
own body and my partner's, and the
conversations of the dance. a good while later,
there came a knock at the front door—a big
knock and a big voice, too. at that, everybody
got still; then a man's chest bumped the
swinging doors open and the man himself
stepped inside. the man resembled the voice a
good deal.
for us, he wa'n't francisco real yet, but you
couldn't deny he was a tall, muscular sort of
man, dressed head to foot in black, with a shawl
around his shoulders about the color of a bay
horse. i remember his face being indian-like, 
unsociable.
one of the swinging doors hit me when it
banged open. like the damn fool i am, i
reached out and swung at the fellow with my
left hand while with my right i went for the
knife i kept sharp and waiting in the armhole of
my vest, under my left arm. if we'd've tangled, i
wouldn't have lasted long. the man put out his
arm—and it was all he had to do—and brushed
me aside, like he was brushing away a fly. so
there i was—half sprawled there behind the
door, with my hand still under my vest, holding
on to my useless weapon, while he just kept
walking, like nothing had happened, right on
into the room. just kept walking—taller than
any of the boys that were stepping aside to
make way for him, and acting like we were all
invisible. the first row of fellows—pure eyetalians,
an' all eyes—opened out like a fan, and
fast. but that wa'n't about to last. in the pack
just behind those first fellows, the englishman
was waiting for him, and before that
englishman could feel the stranger's hand on
his shoulder, he floored him with a roundhouse 
he had waitin'—and no sooner had he landed
his punch than the party started in for serious.
the place was yards and yards deep, but they
herded the stranger from one end of it to the
other, bumping him and shoving him and
whistling and spitting. at first they'd hit him
with their fists, but then when they saw that he
didn't so much as put up a hand to try to block
their punches, they started slapping him—
sometimes with their open hands and
sometimes just with the harmless fringe on
their shawls, like they were makin' fun of him.
and also like they were reserving him for
rosendo, who hadn't budged from where he
was standing, back against the back wall, and
without saying a word. he was taking quick
puffs of his cigarette—i will say that—like he
already had an inkling of what the rest of us
would see clear enough later on. the
yardmaster—straight and bloody, and the wind
from that jeering mob behind him—was getting
pushed and shoved back to rosendo. whistled
at, beaten, spit on, as soon as he came face to
face with rosendo, he spoke. he looked at him 
and he wiped off his face with his arm, and he
said this:
"i'm francisco real, from up on the
northside. francisco real, and they call me the
yardmaster. i've let these poor sons of bitches
lift their hands to me because what i'm looking
for is a man. there are people out there—i
figure they're just talkers, you know—saying
there's some guy down here in these boondocks
that fancies himself a knife fighter, and a
bad'un—say he's called the sticker. i'd like to
make his acquaintance, so he could show me—
me being nobody, you understand—what it
means to be a man of courage, a man you can
look up to."
he said that, and he never took his eyes off
him. now a sticker for real glinted in his right
hand—no doubt he'd had it up his sleeve the
whole time. all around, the fellows that had
been pushing to get close started backing away,
and every one of us was looking at the two of
them, and you could have heard a pin drop.
why, even the black gentleman that played the
violin, a blind man he was, he had his face
turned that way.
just then i hear movement behind me, and i
see that in the doorway there's standing six or
seven men, which would be the yardmaster's
gang, you see. the oldest of them, a weatherbeaten,
country-looking man with a graystreaked
mustache, steps forward and stands
there like he's dazzled by all the women and all
the light, and he very respectfully takes his hat
off. the others just stood there watching,
keeping their eyes open, ready to step in, you
see, if somebody wanted to start playing dirty.
meantime, what was happening with
rosendo—why hadn't he come out slashing at
that swaggering son of a bitch? he hadn't said a
word yet, hadn't so much as raised his eyes. his
cigarette, i don't know whether he spit it out or
whether it just fell out of his face. finally he
managed to get a few words out, but so quiet
that those of us down at the other end of the
room couldn't hear what he was saying. then
francisco real called him out again, and again
rosendo refused to rise to the occasion. so at
that, the youngest of the strangers—just a kid he 
was—he whistled. la lujanera looked at him
with hate in her eyes and she started through
that crowd with her braid down her back—
through that crowd of men and whores—and
she walked up to her man and she put her hand
to his chest and she pulled out his naked blade
and she handed it to him.
"rosendo, i think you're needing this," she
said.
right up next to the roof there was this long
kind of window that looked out over the creek.
rosendo took the knife in his two hands and he
seemed to be trying to place it, like he didn't
recognize it. then all of a sudden he reared back
and flung that knife straight through the
window, out into the maldonado. i felt a cold
chill run down my spine.
"the only reason i don't carve you up for
beefsteak is that you make me sick," said the
stranger. at that, la lujanera threw her arms
around this yardmaster's neck, and she looked
at him with those eyes of hers, and she said,
with anger in her voice:
"forget that dog—he had us thinking he was 
a man."
francisco real stood there perplexed for a
second, and then he put his arms around her
like it was going to be forever, and he yelled at
the musicians to play something—a tango, a
milonga—and then yelled at the rest of us to
dance. the milonga ran like a grass fire from
one end of the room to the other. real danced
straight-faced, but without any daylight
between him and her, now that he could get
away with it.
they finally came to the door, and he yelled:
"make ways, boys—she's gettin' sleepy!"
that's what he said, and they walked out
cheek to cheek, like in the drunken dizziness of
the tango, like they were drowning in that
tango.
i ought to be ashamed of myself. i spun
around the floor a couple of times with one of
the girls and then i just dropped her—on
account of the heat and the crowdedness, i told
her—and i slunk down along the wall till i got to
the door. it was a pretty night—but a pretty
night for who? down at the corner stood that
hack, with those two guitars sitting up straight
on the seat, like two christian gentlemen. it
galled me to see those guitars left out like that,
to realize that those boys thought so little of us
that they'd trust us not even to walk off with
their cheap guitars. it made me mad to feel like
we were a bunch of nobodies.
i grabbed the carnation behind my ear and
threw it in a mud puddle and then i stood there
looking at it, more or less so i wouldn't have to
think of anything else. i wished it was already
the next day, so i'd have this night behind me.
just then, somebody elbowed me, and it felt
almost like a relief. it was rosendo, slipping
through the neighborhood all by himself.
"seems like you're always in the way,
asshole," he muttered as he passed by me—i
couldn't say whether to get it off his chest or
because he had his mind on something else. he
took the direction where it was darkest, down
along the maldonado; i never saw the man
again.
i stood there looking at the things i'd been
seeing all my life—a sky that went on forever, 
the creek flowing angry-like down below there,
a sleeping horse, the dirt street, the kilns—and i
was struck by the thought that i was just
another weed growing along those banks,
coming up between the soap-worts and the
bone piles of the tanneries. what was supposed
to grow out of trash heaps if it wa'n't us? —we
was big talkers, but soft when it came to a fight,
all mouth and no backbone. then i told myself
it wa'n't like that— the tougher the
neighborhood, the tougher a man necessarily
had to be. a trash heap? —
the milonga was having itself a ball, there
was plenty of racket in the houses, and the wind
brought the smell of honeysuckle. the night
was pretty, but so what? there were enough
stars that you got dizzy lookin' at 'em, one on
top of another up there. i struggled, i tell you,
to make myself feel like none of what had
happened meant anything to me, but rosendo's
turning tail, that stranger's insufferable bullying
—it wouldn't let me alone. the tall son of a
bitch had even gotten himself a woman for the
night out of it. 
for that night and many more nights
besides, i thought to myself, and maybe for all
the rest of his nights, because la lujanera was
serious medicine. lord knows which way they'd
gone. but they couldn't be far. probably at it
hammer and tongs right now, in the first ditch
they'd come to.
when i finally got back inside, that perfectly
pleasant little dance was still going on, like
nothing had ever happened.
making myself as inconspicuous as i could, i
peered around through the crowd, and i saw
that one and another of our boys had slipped
out, but the guys from the northside were
tangoing along with everybody else. there was
no elbowing or words or anything; everything
was real polite, but everybody was keeping their
eyes open. the music was kind of sleepy, and
the girls that were dancing with the northside
boys were as meek as mice.
i was expecting something, but not what
turned out to happen.
outside we heard a woman crying, and then
a voice that was familiar in a way, but calm,
almost too calm, as though it didn't belong to a
real person, saying to her:
"go ahead, darlin', go on in," and then some
more of the woman's crying. then the voice
seemed to be getting a little desperate.
"open the door, i said! open the door, you
motherless bitch, open the door!"
at that, the rickety doors swung open and la
lujanera stepped in, alone. she came in kind of
looking over her shoulder, like somebody was
herding her inside.
"she's got a spirit back there commanding
her," said the englishman.
"a dead man, my friend," said the
yardmaster then. his face was like a
drunkard's. he came in, and he took a few
unsteady steps into the clearing that we all
made for him, like we had before. he stood
there tall, and unseeing, and then he toppled
like a post. one of the boys that had come with
him turned him over on his back and put his
poncho under his head for a pillow. the boy's
hands came away bloody.
that was when we saw that he had a big knife 
wound in his chest; his blood was pooling up
and turnin' black this bright red neckerchief he
was wearing, but that i hadn't noticed before
because his shawl had covered it. to try to stop
the blood, one of the girls brought over some
rotgut and scorched rags. he was in no
condition to tell us what'd happened, and la
lujanera was looking at him sort of vacant-like,
with her arms just hanging down at her sides.
everybody was asking her what happened with
their eyes, and finally she managed to find her
voice. she said that after she'd gone outside
with the yardmaster there, they went off to a
little vacant lot, and just then a stranger
appeared and desperately called out the
yardmaster to fight, and he stabbed him, gave
him that wound there, and she swore she didn't
know who the man was, but it wa'n't rosendo.
who was going to believe that?
the man at our feet was dying. my thought
was, whoever had fixed his clock, his hand had
been pretty steady. but the yardmaster was
tough, you had to give him that. when he came
to the door just now, julia had been brewing up 
some mate, and the mate went around the
room and came all the way back to me before he
was finally dead. "cover my face," he said, when
he knew he couldn't last anymore. his pride
was all he had left, and he wa'n't going to let
people gawk at the expressions on his face while
he lay there dyin'. somebody put that highcrowned
black hat over his face, and he died
under it, without a sound. when his chest
stopped rising and falling, somebody got up the
nerve to uncover him—he had that tired look
that dead men get. he was one of the toughest
men there was back then, from bateríato the
southside—but no sooner was he dead and his
mouth shut for all time, i lost all my hate for
him.
"all it takes to die is to be alive," one of the
girls back in the crowd said, and then another
one said something else, in a pensive sort of
way:
"man thought so highly of himself, and all
he's good for now is to draw flies."
at that, the northsiders all muttered
something to each other, real low, and then two 
of 'em at the same time said it out loud:
"the woman killed'im."
one of 'em yelled in her face, asking her if it
was her that did it, and they all surrounded her.
at that i forgot all about being meek and not
getting in anybody's way, and i pushed through
to her like a shot.
i'm such a damn fool, it's a wonder as mad as
i was i didn't pull out the little dagger i always
carried on me. i could feel almost everybody—
not to say everybody—looking at me.
"look at this woman's hands," i said with a
sneer. "do they look steady enough—does she
look like she'd have heart enough—to put a
yardmaster like that?"
then i added, cool but tough at the same
time:
"who'd've thought the dear departed, who
they say was a man to be reckoned with on his
own turf, would've ended up this way, and in a
back-water as dead as this is, where nothin' ever
happens unless some strangers wander in to
give us somethin' to talk about and stay around
to get spit on afterward?" 
nobody rose to that bait, either.
just then through the silence came the sound
of riders. it was the police. for one reason or
another, everybody there had reason to keep
the law out of this, so they decided that the best
thing was to move the body down to the creek.
you'll recall that long window that the gleam of
the knife sailed through?
well, that's the very same way the man in
black went. a bunch of them lifted him up and
after they'd separated him from all the money
and whatnot he had on him, somebody hacked
off his finger to get to the ring he wore.
vultures, señor, to pick over a poor defenseless
dead man like that, after another, better man
has fixed'im. then a heave-ho, and that
rushing, long-suffering water carried him away.
i couldn't say whether they gutted him*—i
didn't want to look. the gray-mustached
individual never took his eyes off me. la
lujanera took advantage of all the shufflingabout
to disappear.
by the time the law came in to have their
look around, the dance had a pretty good head
of steam up again. the blind man on the violin
knew how to play habaneras the likes of which
you won't hear anymore. outside, the day began
to want to dawn a little. there was a line of
arborvitae posts along the top of a hill, standing
there all alone-like, because you couldn't see the
thin strands of wire between 'em that early in
the morning.
i strolled nice and easy on home to my place,
which was about three blocks away. there was a
light burning in the window, but then it went
out. when i saw that, i can tell you i moved a
good bit faster.
and then, borges, for the second time i
pulled out that short, sharp-edged knife i
always carried here, under my vest, under my
left arm, and i gave it another long slow
inspection—and it was just like new, all
innocent, and there was not the slightest trace
of blood on it. 
et cetera
for néstor ibarra
a theologian in death
i have been told by angels that when
melancthon died, a house was prepared for him
like that in which he had lived in the world. this
also is done with most of the newcomers, owing
to which they do not know that they are not still
in the natural world.... the things in his room,
also, were all like those he had before, a similar
table, a similar desk with compartments, and
also a similar library; so that as soon as he
awakened from sleep, he seated himself at the
table and continued his writing, as if he were
not a dead body, and this on the subject of
justification by faith alone, and so on for several
days, and writing nothing whatever concerning
charity. as the angels perceived this, he was
asked through messengers why he did not write
about charity also. he replied that there was
nothing of the church in charity, for if that were
to be received as in any way an essential
attribute of the church, man would also ascribe 
to himself the merit of justification and
consequently of salvation, and so also he would
rob faith of its spiritual essence. he said these
things arrogantly, but he did not know that he
was dead and that the place to which he had
been sent was not heaven. when the angels
perceived this, they withdrew....
a few weeks after this, the things which he
used in his room began to be obscured, and at
length to disappear, until at last there was
nothing left there but the chair, the table, the
paper and the inkstand; and, moreover, the
walls of his room seemed to be plastered with
lime, and the floor to be covered with a yellow,
brick-like material, and he himself seemed to be
more coarsely clad. still, he went on writing,
and since he persisted in his denial of charity...
he suddenly seemed to himself to be under
ground in a sort of workhouse, where there
were other theologians like him. and when he
wished to go out he was detained.... at this, he
began to question his ideas, and he was taken
out, and sent back to his former chamber....
when sent back, he appeared clad in a hairy
skin, but he tried to imagine that what had gone
before had been a mere hallucination, and he
went on praising faith and denying charity. one
evening at dusk, he felt a chill. that led him to
walk through the house, and he realized that
the other rooms were no longer those of the
dwelling in which he had lived on earth. one
room was filled with unknown instruments,
another had shrunk so much that he could not
enter it; another one had not itself changed, but
its windows and doors opened onto great sand
dunes. there was a room at the rear of the
house in which there were three tables, at which
sat men like himself, who also cast charity into
exile, and he said that he conversed with them,
and was confirmed by them day by day, and
told that no other theologian was as wise as he.
he was smitten by that adoration, but since
some of the persons had no face, and others
were like dead men, he soon came to abominate
and mistrust them. then he began to write
something about charity; but what he wrote on
the paper one day, he did not see the next; for
this happens to every one there when he
commits any thing to paper from the external
man only, and not at the same time from the
internal, thus from compulsion and not from
freedom; it is obliterated of itself....
when any novitiates from the world entered
his room to speak with him and to see him, he
was ashamed that they should find him in such
a sordid place, and so he would summon one of
the magical spirits, who by phantasy could
produce various becoming shapes, and who
then adorned his room with ornaments and
with flowered tapestry.... but as soon as the
visitors were gone, these shapes vanished, and
the former lime-plastering and emptiness
returned, and sometimes before.
the last word we have of melancthon is that
the wizard and one of the men without a face
carried him out to the sand dunes, where he is
now a servant to demons.
(from emanuel swedenborg, arcana
cœlestia)
the chamber of statues
in the early days, there was a city in the
kingdom of the andalusians where their
monarchs lived and its name was labtayt, or
ceuta, or jaén. in that city, there was a strong
tower whose gate (of two portals breadth) was
neither for going in nor for coming out, but for
keeping closed. and whenever a king died and
another king took the kingship after him, with
his own hands, he set a new and strong lock to
that gate, till there were four-and-twenty locks
upon the tower, according to the number of
kings. after this time, there came to the throne
an evil man, who was not of the old royal house,
and instead of setting a new lock, he had a mind
to open these locks, that he might see what was
within the tower. the grandees of his kingdom
forbade him this and pressed him to desist and
reproved him and blamed him; they hid from
him the iron key ring and told him that it was
much easier to add a new lock to the gate than
to force four-and-twenty, but he persisted,
saying, "needs must this place be opened."
then they offered him all that their hands
possessed of monies and treasures and things of
price, of flocks, of christian idols, of gold and 
silver, if he would but refrain; still, he would not
be baulked, and said "there is no help for it but
i open this tower." so he pulled off the locks
with his right hand (which will now burn
through all eternity) and entering, found within
the tower figures of arabs on their horses and
camels, habited in turbands hanging down at
the ends, with swords in baldrick-belts thrown
over their shoulders and bearing long lances in
their hands. all these figures were round, as in
life, and threw shadows on the ground; a blind
man could identify them by touch, and the front
hooves of their horses did not touch the ground
yet they did not fall, as though the mounts were
rearing. these exquisite figures filled the king
with great amazement; even more wonderful
was the excellent order and silence that one saw
in them, for every figure's head was turned to
the same side (the west) while not a single voice
or clarion was heard. such was the first room in
the castle. in the second, the king found the
table that belonged to suleyman, son of david—
salvation be with both of them! this table was
carved from a single grass-green emerald, a
stone whose occult properties are indescribable
yet genuine, for it calms the tempest, preserves
the chastity of its wearer, keeps off dysentery
and evil spirits, brings favorable outcome to
lawsuits, and is of great relief in childbearing.
in the third room, two books were found:
one was black and taught the virtues of each
metal, each talisman, and each day, together
with the preparation of poisons and antidotes;
the other was white, and though the script was
clear, its lesson could not be deciphered. in the
fourth room found he a mappamundi figuring
the earth and the seas and the different cities
and countries and villages of the world, each
with its true name and exact shape.
in the fifth, they found a marvelous mirror,
great and round, of mixed metals, which had
been made for suleyman, son of david—on the
twain be forgiveness!—wherein whoso looked
might see the counterfeit presentment of his
parents and his children, from the first adam to
those who shall hear the trumpet. the sixth
room was filled with that hermetic powder, one
drachma of which elixir can change three
thousand drachms of silver into three thousand
drachms of gold. the seventh appeared empty,
and it was so long that the ablest of the king's
archers might have loosed an arrow from its
doorway without hitting the distant wall.
carved on that far wall, they saw a terrible
inscription. the king examined it, and
understood it, and it spoke in this wise: "if any
hand opens the gate of this castle, the warriors
of flesh at the entrance, who resemble warriors
of metal, shall take possession of the kingdom."
these things occurred in the eighty-ninth
year of the hegira. before the year reached its
end, tarkio bin zayid would conquer that city
and slay this king after the sorriest fashion and
sack the city and make prisoners of the women
and boys therein and get great loot. thus it was
that the arabs spread all over the cities of
andalusia—a kingdom of fig trees and watered
plains in which no man suffered thirst. as for
the treasures, it is widely known that tarik, son
of zayid, sent them to his lord, the caliph alwalid
bin abd al-malik, who entombed them in
a pyramid. 
(from the book of the thousand nights and
a night, night 272)*
the story of the two dreamers
the arab historian al-ishaqi tells the story of
this event:" it is related by men worthy of belief
(though only allah is omniscient and
omnipotent and all-merciful and unsleeping)
that a man of cairo was possessed of ample
riches and great wealth; but he was so generous
and magnanimous that his wealth passed away,
save his father's house, and his state changed,
and he became utterly destitute, and could not
obtain his sustenance save by laborious
exertion. and he slept one night, overwhelmed
and oppressed, under a fig tree in his garden,
and saw in his sleep a person dripping wet who
took from his mouth a golden coin and said to
him, 'verily thy fortune is in persia, in isfahan:
therefore seek it and repair to it.' so he
journeyed to persia, meeting on the way with all
the dangers of the desert, and of ships, and of
pirates, and of idolaters, and of rivers, and of
wild beasts, and of men; and when he at last
arrived there, the evening overtook him, and he
slept in a mosque. now there was, adjacent to
the mosque, a house; and as allah (whose name
be exalted!) had decreed, a party of robbers
entered the mosque, and thence passed to that
house; and the people of the house, awaking at
the disturbance occasioned by the robbers,
raised cries; the neighbors made a cry as well,
whereupon the wálee came to their aid with his
followers, and the robbers fled over the
housetops.
the wálee then entered the mosque, and
found the man of cairo sleeping there; so he
laid hold upon him, and inflicted upon him a
painful beating with mikra'ahs, until he was at
the point of death, and imprisoned him; and he
remained three days in the prison; after which,
the wálee caused him to be brought, and said to
him, 'from what country art thou?' he
answered, 'from cairo.' —'and what affair,' said
the wálee, 'was the cause of thy coming to
persia?' he answered, 'i saw in my sleep a
person who said to me, "verily thy fortune is in
isfahan; therefore repair to it." and when i
came here, i found the fortune of which he told
me to be those blows of the mikra'ahs, that i
have received from thee.'—
"and upon this the wálee laughed so that his
grinders appeared, and said to him, 'o thou of
little sense, i saw three times in my sleep a
person who said to me, "verily a house in cairo,
in such a district, and of such a description,
hath in its court a garden, at the lower end of
which is a fountain, wherein is wealth of great
amount: therefore repair to it and take it." but i
went not; and thou, through the smallness of
they sense, hast journeyed from city to city on
account of a thing thou hast seen in sleep, when
it was only an effect of confused dreams.'—then
he gave him some money, and said to him,
'help thyself with this to return to thy city.'
"so he took it and returned to cairo. now the
house which the wálee had described, in cairo,
was the house of that man; therefore when he
arrived at his abode, he dug beneath the
fountain, and beheld abundant wealth. thus
god enriched and sustained him; and this was a
wonderful coincidence." 
(from the book of the thousand nights and
a night, night 351)
the wizard that was made to wait
in santiago de compostela, there was once a
dean of the cathedral who was greedy to learn
the art of magic. he heard a rumor that a man
named ulan, who lived in the city of toledo,
knew more things respecting this art than any
other man, and he set off to toledo to find him.
the day the dean arrived, he went directly to
the place whereillánlived and found him at his
books, in a room at the rear of the house. ulan
greeted the dean kindly, but begged that he put
off the business of his journey until after they
had eaten. he showed him to a cool apartment
and told him he was very glad that he had come.
after dinner, the dean explained the purpose of
his journey, and askedillánto teach him the
occult science. ulan told him that he had
divined that his visitor was a dean, a man of
good position and promising future; he told
him, also, however, that he feared that should
he teach him as he asked, the dean would forget 
him afterward. the dean promised that he
would never forget the kindness shown him by
illán, and said he would be forever in his debt.
when that vow was made,illántold the dean
that the magic arts could be learned only in a
retired place, and he took him by the hand and
led him into an adjoining room, where there
was a large iron ring in the floor. first, however,
he instructed his serving-woman that they
would have partridge for dinner, though he told
her not to put them on the fire until he bade her
do so. the two men together lifted the iron ring,
and they began to descend a stairway hewn with
skill from stone; so far did they descend these
stairs that the dean would have sworn they had
gone beneath the bed of the tagus. at the foot
of the stairway there was a cell, and then a
library, and then a sort of cabinet, or private
study, filled with instruments of magic. they
thumbed through the books, and as they were
doing this, two men entered with a letter for the
dean. this letter had been sent him by the
bishop, his uncle, and it informed him that his
uncle was taken very ill; if the dean wished to
see him alive, the letter said, he should return
home without delay. this news vexed the dean
greatly, in the first instance because of his
uncle's illness, but second because he was
obliged to interrupt his studies. he resolved to
send his regrets, and he sent the letter to the
bishop. in three days, several men arrived,
dressed in mourning and bringing further
letters for the dean, informing him that his
uncle the bishop had died, that a successor was
being chosen, and that it was hoped that by the
grace of god he himself would be elected. these
letters also said that he should not trouble
himself to come, since it would be much better
if he were elected in absentia.
ten days later, two very well-turned-out
squires came to where the dean was at his
studies; they threw themselves at his feet,
kissed his hand, and addressed him as "bishop."
when illán saw these things, he went with
great happiness to the new prelate and told him
he thanked god that such good news should
make its way to his humble house. then he
asked that one of his sons be given the vacant 
deanship. the bishop informed him that he had
reserved that position for his own brother, but
that he was indeed resolved to show illan's son
favor, and that the three of them should set off
together for santiago at once.
the three men set off for santiago, where
they were received with great honors. six
months later, the bishop received messengers
from the pope, who offered him the
archbishopric of tolosa and left to the bishop
himself the choice of his successor. when illán
learned this news, he reminded the bishop of
his old promise and requested the bishopric for
his son. the new archbishop informed ulan
that he had reserved the bishopric for his own
uncle, his father's brother, but that he was
indeed resolved to show illan's son favor, and
that they should set off together for tolosa at
once. illán had no choice but to agree.
the three men set off for tolosa, where they
were received with great honors and with
masses. two years later, the archbishop
received messengers from the pope, who
offered him a cardinal's biretta and left to the
archbishop himself the choice of his successor.
when illán learned this news, he reminded the
archbishop of his old promise and requested the
archbishopric for his son. the new cardinal
informedillánthat he had reserved the
archbishopric for his own uncle, his mother's
brother, but that he was indeed resolved to
show illan's son favor, and he insisted that they
set out together for rome at once. illán had no
choice but to agree.
the three men set out together for rome,
where they were received with great honors and
with masses and processions. four years later
the pope died, and our cardinal was
unanimously elected to the holy see by his
brother cardinals. when illán learned this
news, he kissed the feet of his holiness,
reminded him of his old promise, and requested
that his son be made cardinal in his holiness'
place. the pope threatened illán with
imprisonment, telling him that he knew very
well he was a wizard who when he had lived in
toledo had been no better than a teacher of
magic arts. the miserable illán said he would 
return to spain, then, and begged of the pope a
morsel to eat along the way. the pope refused.
then it was that illán (whose face had become
young again in a most extraordinary way) said
in a firm and steady voice:
"then i shall have to eat those partridges
that i ordered up for tonight's supper."
the serving-woman appeared and illán told
her to put the partridges on the fire. at those
words, the pope found himself in the cell under
illan's house in toledo, a poor dean of the
cathedral of santiagode compostela, and so
ashamed of his ingratitude that he could find no
words by which to beg illan's forgiveness. illán
declared that the trial to which he'd put the
dean sufficed; he refused him his portion of the
partridges and went with him to the door,
where he wished him a pleasant journey and
sent him off most courteously.
(from the libro de patronio by the infante
don juan manuel, who took it in turn from an
arabic volume, the forty mornings and the
forty nights)
the mirror of ink
history records that the crudest of the
governors of the sudan was yãqub the afflicted,
who abandoned his nation to the iniquities of
egyptian tax collectors and died in a chamber of
the palace on the fourteenth day of the moon of
barmajat in the year 1842. there are those who
insinuate that the sorcerer abderramenalmasmudï
(whose name might be translated
"the servant of mercy") murdered him with a
dagger or with poison, but a natural death is
more likely—especially as he was known as "the
afflicted." nonetheless, capt. richard francis
burton spoke with this sorcerer in 1853, and he
reported that the sorcerer told him this story
that i shall reproduce here:
"it is true that i suffered captivity in the
fortress of yakub the afflicted, due to the
conspiracy forged by my brother ibrahim, with
the vain and perfidious aid of the black
chieftains of kordofan, who betrayed him. my
brother perished by the sword upon the bloody
pelt of justice, but i threw myself at the
abominated feet of the afflicted one and told
him i was a sorcerer, and that if he granted me
my life i would show him forms and
appearances more marvelous than those of the
fanusi jihal, the magic lantern. the tyrant
demanded an immediate proof; i called for a
reed pen, a pair of scissors, a large sheet of
venetian paper, an inkhorn, a chafing-dish with
live charcoal in it, a few coriander seeds, and an
ounce of benzoin. i cut the paper into six strips
and wrote charms and invocations upon the
first five; on the last i inscribed the following
words from the glorious qur'an: 'we have
removed from thee thy veil, and thy sight is
piercing.' then i drew a magic square in
yakub's right palm and asked him to hold it out
to me; into it, i poured a circle of ink. i asked
him whether he could see his face in the circle,
and he told me that he could see it clearly. i
instructed him not to raise his eyes. i put the
benzoin and the coriander seeds into the
chafing-dish and therein also burned the
invocations. i asked the afflicted one to name
the figure that he wished to see. he thought for
a moment and told me that he wished to see a 
wild horse, the most beautiful creature that
grazed upon the meadows that lie along the
desert. he looked, and he saw first green and
peaceful fields and then a horse coming toward
him, as graceful as a leopard and with a white
star upon its forehead. he then asked me for a
herd of such horses, as perfect as the first, and
he saw upon the horizon a long cloud of dust,
and then the herd. i sensed that my life was
safe.
"hardly had the sun appeared above the
horizon when two soldiers entered my cell and
conveyed me to the chamber of the afflicted
one, wherein i found awaiting me the incense,
the chafing-dish, and the ink.
thus day by day did he make demands upon
my skill, and thus day by day did i show to him
the appearances of this world. that dead man
whom i abominate held within his hand all that
dead men have seen and all that living men see:
the cities, climes, and kingdoms into which this
world is divided, the hidden treasures of its
center, the ships that sail its seas, its
instruments of war and music and surgery, its
graceful women, its fixed stars and the planets,
the colors taken up by the infidel to paint his
abominable images, its minerals and plants
with the secrets and virtues which they hold,
the angels of silver whose nutriment is our
praise and justification of the lord, the passingout
of prizes in its schools, the statues of birds
and kings that lie within the heart of its
pyramids, the shadow thrown by the bull upon
whose shoulders this world is upheld, and by
the fish below the bull, the deserts of allah the
merciful. he beheld things impossible to
describe, such as streets illuminated by gaslight
and such as the whale that dies when it hears
man's voice. once he commanded me to show
him the city men call europe. i showed him the
grandest of its streets and i believe that it was
in that rushing flood of men, all dressed in
black and many wearing spectacles, that he saw
for the first time the masked one.
"from that time forth, that figure, sometimes
in the dress of the sudanese, sometimes in
uniform, but ever with a veil upon its face, crept
always into the visions. though it was never
absent, we could not surmise who it might be.
and yet the appearances within the mirror of
ink, at first momentary or unmoving, became
now more complex; they would unhesitatingly
obey my commands, and the tyrant could
clearly follow them. in these occupations, both
of us, it is true, sometimes became exhausted.
the abominable nature of the scenes was
another cause of weariness; there was nothing
but tortures, garrotes, mutilations, the
pleasures of the executioner and the cruel man.
"thus did we come to the morning of the
fourteenth day of the moon of barmajat. the
circle of ink had been poured into the palm, the
benzoin sprinkled into the chafing-dish, the
invocations burned. the two of us werealone.
the afflicted one commanded me to show him
a just and irrevocable punishment, for that day
his heart craved to see a death. i showed him
soldiers with tambours, the stretched hide of a
calf, the persons fortunate enough to look on,
the executioner with the sword of justice. the
afflicted one marvelled to see this, and said to
me: it is abu kir, the man that slew thy brother 
ibrahim, theman that will close thy life when i
am able to command the knowledge to convoke
these figures without thy aid. he asked me to
bring forth the condemned man, yet when he
was brought forth the afflicted one grew still,
because it was the enigmatic man that kept the
white cloth always before his visage. the
afflicted one commanded me that before the
man was killed, his mask should be stripped
from him. i threw myself at his feet and said: o
king of time and substance and peerless
essence of the century, this figure is not like the
others, for we know not his name nor that of
his fathers nor that of the city which is his
homeland. therefore, o king, i dare not touch
him, for fear of committing a sin for which i
shall be held accountable. the afflicted one
laughed and swore that he himself would bear
the responsibility for the sin, if sin it was. he
swore this by his sword and by the qur'an. then
it was that i commanded that the condemned
man be stripped naked and bound to the
stretched hide of the calf and his mask removed
from him. those things were accomplished; the 
horrified eyes of yakub at last saw the visage—
which was his own face. in fear and madness,
he hid his eyes. i held in my firm right hand his
trembling hand and commanded him to look
upon the ceremony of his death. he was
possessed by the mirror; he did not even try to
turn his eyes aside, or to spill out the ink.
when in the vision the sword fell upon the
guilty neck, he moaned and cried out in a voice
that inspired no pity in me, and fell to the floor,
dead.
"glory to him who does not die, and who
holds within his hand the two keys, of infinite
pardon and infinite punishment."
(from richard francis burton, the lake
regions of equatorial africa)*
mahomet’s double
since the idea of mahomed is always
connected with religion in the minds of
mahomedans, therefore in the spiritual world
some mahomed or other is always placed in
their view. it is not mahomed himself, who
wrote the koran, but some other who fills his 
place; nor is it always the same person, but he is
changed according to circumstances. a native of
saxony, who was taken prisoner by the
algerines, and turned mahomedan, once acted
in this character. he having been a christian,
was led to speak with them of the lord jesus,
affirming that he was not the son of joseph, but
the son of god himself. this mahomed was
afterwards replaced by others. in the place
where that representative mahomed has his
station, a fire, like a small torch, appears, in
order that he may be distinguished; but it is
visible only to mahomedans.
the real mahomed, who wrote the koran, is
not at this day to be seen among them. i have
been informed that at first he was appointed to
preside over them; but being desirous to rule
over all the concerns of their religion as a god,
he was removed from his station, and was sent
down to one on the right side near the south. a
certain society of mahomedans was once
instigated by some evil spirits to acknowledge
mahomed as a god, and in order to appease the
sedition mahomed was raised up from the earth 
or region beneath, and produced to their view;
and on this occasion i also saw him. he
appeared like corporeal spirits, who have no
interior perception. his face was of a hue
approaching to black; and i heard him utter
these words, "i am your mahomed," and
presently he seemed to sink down again.
(from emanuel swedenborg, vera
christiana religio [1771])*
index of sources:
the cruel redeemer lazarus morell: mark
twain, life on the mississippi. new york, 1883.
bernard de voto, mark twain's america.
boston, 1932.
the improbable impostor tom castro:
philip gosse, the history of piracy. london,
cambridge, 1911.
the widow ching—pirate: philip gosse, the
history of piracy. london, cambridge, 1911.
monk eastman, purveyor of iniquities:
herbert asbury, the gangs of new york. new
york, 1927.
the disinterested killer bill harrigan:
frederick watson, a century of gunmen.
london, 1931. walter noble burns, the saga of
billy the kid. new york, 1925.
the uncivil teacher of court etiquette
kôtsukéno suké: a. b. mitford, tales of old
japan. london, 1912.
hakim, the masked dyer of merv: sir percy
sykes, a history of persia. london, 1915. ------
---, die vernichtung der rose, nach dem
arabischen urtext übertragen von alexander
schulz. leipzig, 1927.
fictions (1944)
for esther zemborainde torres
the garden of forking paths (1941)
foreword
the eight stories* in this book require no
great elucidation. the eighth ("the garden of
forking paths") is a detective story; its readers
will witness the commission and all the
preliminaries of a crime whose purpose will not
be kept from them but which they will not
understand, i think, until the final paragraph.
the others are tales of fantasy; one of them—
"the lottery in babylon"—is not wholly
innocent of symbolism. i am not the first author
of the story called " the library of babel"; those
curious as to its history and prehistory may
consult the appropriate page of sur,* no. 59,
which records the heterogeneous names of
leucippus and lasswitz, lewis carroll and
aristotle. in "the circular ruins," all is unreal;
in "pierre menard, author of the quixote]' the
unreality lies in the fate the story's protagonist
imposes upon himself. the catalog of writings i
have ascribed to him is not terribly amusing,
but it is not arbitrary, either; it is a diagram of
his mental history....
it is a laborious madness and an
impoverishing one, the madness of composing
vast books—setting out in five hundred pages
an idea that can be perfectly related orally in
five minutes. the better way to go about it is to
pretend that those books already exist, and
offer a summary, a commentary on them. that
was carlyle's procedure in sartor resartus,
butler's in the fair haven —though those
works suffer under the imperfection that they
themselves are books, and not a whit less
tautological than the others. a more reasonable,
more inept, and more lazy man, i have chosen
to write notes on imaginary books.
those notes are "tlön, uqbar, orbis tertius"
and "a survey of the works of herbert quain."
j.l.b.
tlön, uqbar, orbis tertius
i.
i owe the discovery of uqbar to the
conjunction of a mirror and an encyclopedia.
the mirror troubled the far end of a hallway in
a large country house on calle gaona, in ramos
mejia*; the encyclopedia is misleadingly titled
the anglo-american cyclopaedia (new york,
1917), and is a literal (though also laggardly)
reprint of the 1902 encyclopœdia britannica.
the event took place about five years ago. 
bioy casares *had come to dinner at my
house that evening, and we had lost all track of
time in a vast debate over the way one might go
about composing a first-person novel whose
narrator would omit or distort things and
engage in all sorts of contradictions, so that a
few of the book's readers—a very few—might
divine the horrifying or banal truth. down at
that far end of the hallway, the mirror hovered,
shadowing us. we discovered (very late at night
such a discovery is inevitable) that there is
something monstrous about mirrors. that was
when bioy remembered a saying by one of the
heresiarchs of uqbar: mirrors and copulation
are abominable, for they multiply the number
of mankind. i asked him where he'd come
across that memorable epigram, and he told me
it was recorded in the anglo-american
cyclopaedia, in its article on uqbar.
the big old house (we had taken it furnished)
possessed a copy of that work. on the last pages
of volume xlvi we found an article on
uppsala; on the first of volume xlvii, "uralaltaic
languages"—not a word on uqbar. bioy, 
somewhat bewildered, consulted the volumes of
the index. he tried every possible spelling:
ukbar, ucbar, ookbar, oukbahr ... all in vain.
before he left, he told me it was a region in iraq
or asia minor. i confess i nodded a bit
uncomfortably; i surmised that that
undocumented country and its anonymous
heresiarch were a fiction that bioy had invented
on the spur of the moment, out of modesty, in
order to justify a fine-sounding epigram. a
sterile search through one of the atlases of
justus perthes reinforced my doubt.
the next day, bioy called me from buenos
aires. he told me he had the article on uqbar
right in front of him—in volume xlvi* of the
encyclopedia. the heresiarch's name wasn't
given, but the entry did report his doctrine,
formulated in words almost identical to those
bioy had quoted, though from a literary point of
view perhaps inferior. bioy had remembered its
being "copulation and mirrors are abominable,"
while the text of the encyclopedia ran for one of
those gnostics, the visible universe was an
illusion or, more precisely, a sophism. mirrors 
and fatherhood are hateful because they
multiply and proclaim it. i told bioy, quite
truthfully, that i'd like to see that article. a few
days later he brought it to me—which surprised
me, because the scrupulous cartographic
indices of hitter's redounded evinced complete
and total ignorance of the existence of the name
uqbar.
the volume bioy brought was indeed volume
xlvi of the anglo-american cyclopaedia. on
both the false cover and spine, the alphabetical
key to the volume's contents (tor-upps) was
the same as ours, but instead of 917 pages,
bioy's volume had 921. those four additional
pages held the article on uqbar—an article not
contemplated (as the reader will have noted) by
the alphabetical key. we later compared the two
volumes and found that there was no further
difference between them. both (as i believe i
have said) are reprints of the tenth edition of
the encyclopœdia britannica. bioy had
purchased his copy at one of his many sales.
we read the article with some care. the
passage that bioy had recalled was perhaps the 
only one that might raise a reader's eyebrow;
the rest seemed quite plausible, very much in
keeping with the general tone of the work, even
(naturally) somewhat boring. rereading it,
however, we discovered that the rigorous
writing was underlain by a basic vagueness. of
the fourteen names that figured in the section
on geography, we recognized only three
(khorasan, armenia, erzerum), and they
interpolated into the text ambiguously. of the
historical names, we recognized only one: the
impostor-wizard smerdis, and he was invoked,
really, as a metaphor. the article seemed to
define the borders of uqbar, but its nebulous
points of reference were rivers and craters and
mountain chains of the region itself. we read,
for example, that the axadelta and the lowlands
of tsai khaldun mark the southern boundary,
and that wild horses breed on the islands of the
delta.
that was at the top of page 918. in the
section on uqbar's history (p. 920), we learned
that religious persecutions in the thirteenth
century had forced the orthodox to seek refuge 
on those same islands, where their obelisks are
still standing and their stone mirrors are
occasionally unearthed. the section titled
"language and literature" was brief. one
memorable feature: the article said that the
literature of uqbar was a literature of fantasy,
and that its epics and legends never referred to
reality but rather to the two imaginary realms of
mle'khnas and tlön.... the bibliography listed
four volumes we have yet to find, though the
third—silas haslam's history of the land
called uqbar (1874)—does figure in the
catalogs published by bernard quaritch,
bookseller.1
[
1haslam was also the author of a general
history of labyrinths.]
the first, lesbare und lesenswerthe
bemerkungen über das land ukkbar in kleinasien,
published in 1641, is the work of one
johannes valentinus andrea. that fact is
significant: two or three years afterward, i came
upon that name in the unexpected pages of de
quincey ( writings, vol. xiii*), where i
learned that it belonged to a german theologian 
who in the early seventeenth century described
an imaginary community, the rosy cross—
which other men later founded, in imitation of
his foredescription.
that night, bioy and i paid a visit to the
national library, where we pored in vain
through atlases, catalogs, the yearly indices
published by geographical societies, the
memoirs of travelers and historians—no one
had ever been in uqbar. nor did the general
index in bioy's copy of the encyclopedia contain
that name. the next day, carlos mastronardi*
(whom i had told about all this) spotted the
black-and-gold spines of the anglo-american
cyclopaedia in a bookshop at the corner of
corrientesand talcahuano.... he went in and
consulted volume xlvi. naturally, he found
not the slightest mention of uqbar.
ii.
some limited and waning memory of herbert
ashe, an engineer for the southern railway
line, still lingers in the hotel at adrogué,
among the effusive honeysuckle vines and in
the illusory depths of the mirrors. in life, ashe
was afflicted with unreality, as so many
englishmen are; in death, he is not even the
ghost he was in life. he was tall and phlegmatic
and his weary rectangular beard had once been
red. i understand that he was a widower, and
without issue. every few years he would go back
to england, to make his visit (i am judging from
some photographs he showed us) to a sundial
and a stand of oak trees.
my father had forged one of those close
english friendships with him (the first adjective
is perhaps excessive) that begin by excluding
confidences and soon eliminate conversation.
they would exchange books and newspapers;
they would wage taciturn battle at chess—i
recall ashe on the hotel veranda, holding a book
of mathematics, looking up sometimes at the
irrecoverable colors of the sky. one evening, we
spoke about the duodecimal number system, in
which twelve is written 10. ashe said that by
coincidence he was just then transposing some
duodecimal table or other to sexagesimal (in
which sixty is written 10). he added that he'd
been commissioned to perform that task by a
norwegian man ... in rio grande do sul. ashe
and i had known each other for eight years, and
he had never mentioned a stay in brazil. we
spoke of the bucolic rural life, of capangas* of
the brazilian etymology of the word "gaucho"
(which some older folk in uruguay still
pronounce as gaucho), and nothing more was
said—god forgive me—of duodecimals. in
september of 1937 (my family and i were no
longer at the hotel), herbert ashe died of a
ruptured aneurysm. a few days before his
death, he had received a sealed, certified
package from brazil containing a book printed
in octavo major. ashe left it in the bar, where,
months later, i found it. i began to leaf through
it and suddenly i experienced a slight,
astonished sense of dizziness that i shall not
describe, since this is the story not of my
emotions but of uqbar and tlön and orbis
tertius. (on one particular islamic night, which
is called the night of nights, the secret portals
of the heavens open wide and the water in the
water jars is sweeter than on other nights; if
those gates had opened as i sat there, i would
not have felt what i was feeling that evening.)
the book was written in english, and it
consisted of 1001 pages. on the leather-bound
volume's yellow spine i read these curious
words, which were repeated on the false cover:
a first encyclopaedia of tlön. vol. xi. hlaer to
jangr. there was no date or place of
publication. on the first page and again on the
onionskin page that covered one of the color
illustrations there was stamped a blue oval with
this inscription: orbis tertius. two years
earlier, i had discovered in one of the volumes
of a certain pirated encyclopedia a brief
description of a false country; now fate had set
before me something much more precious and
painstaking. i now held in my hands a vast and
systematic fragment of the entire history of an
unknown planet, with its architectures and its
playing cards, the horror of its mythologies and
the murmur of its tongues, its emperors and its
seas, its minerals and its birds and fishes, its
algebra and its fire, its theological and
metaphysical controversies—all joined,
articulated, coherent, and with no visible
doctrinal purpose or hint of parody.
in the "volume eleven" of which i speak,
there are allusions to later and earlier volumes.
néstor ibarra, in a now-classic article in the
n.r.f., denied that such companion volumes
exist; ezequiel martinez estrada* and drieu la
rochelle have rebutted that doubt, perhaps
victoriously. the fact is, the most diligent
searches have so far proven futile. in vain have
we ransacked the libraries of the two americas
and europe. alfonso reyes, weary of those
"subordinate drudgeries of a detective nature,"
has proposed that between us, we undertake to
reconstruct the many massive volumes that are
missing: ex ungue leonem. he figures, half
seriously, half in jest, that a generation of
tlönists would suffice. that bold estimate takes
us back to the initial problem: who, singular or
plural, invented tlön? the plural is, i suppose,
inevitable, since the hypothesis of a single
inventor—some infinite leibniz working in
obscurity and self-effacement — has been
unanimously discarded. it is conjectured that
this "brave new world" is the work of a secret
society of astronomers, biologists, engineers,
meta-physicians, poets, chemists, algebraists,
moralists, painters, geometers, guided and
directed by some shadowy man of genius.
there are many men adept in those diverse
disciplines, but few capable of imagination—
fewer still capable of subordinating imagination
to a rigorous and systematic plan. the plan is so
vast that the contribution of each writer is
infinitesimal.
at first it was thought that tlön was a mere
chaos, an irresponsible act of imaginative
license; today we know that it is a cosmos, and
that the innermost laws that govern it have
been formulated, however provisionally so. let
it suffice to remind the reader that the apparent
contradictions of volume eleven are the
foundation stone of the proof that the other
volumes do in fact exist: the order that has been
observed in it is just that lucid, just that fitting.
popular magazines have trumpeted, with
pardonable excess, the zoology and topography
of tlön. in my view, its transparent tigers and 
towers of blood do not perhaps merit the
constant attention of all mankind, but i might
be so bold as to beg a few moments to outline
its conception of the universe.
hume declared for all time that while
berkeley's arguments admit not the slightest
refutation, they inspire not the slightest
conviction. that pronouncement is entirely true
with respect to the earth, entirely false with
respect to tlön. the nations of that planet are,
congenitally, idealistic. their language and
those things derived from their language—
religion, literature, metaphysics—presuppose
idealism. for the people of tlön, the world is
not an amalgam of objects in space; it is a
heterogeneous series of independent acts —the
world is successive, temporal, but not spatial.
there are no nouns in the conjectural
ursprache of tlön, from which its "presentday"
languages and dialects derive: there are
impersonal verbs, modified by monosyllabic
suffixes (or prefixes) functioning as adverbs.
for example, there is no noun that corresponds
to our word "moon," but there is a verb which in 
english would be "to moonate" or "to enmoon."
"the moon rose above the river" is "hlör ufang
axaxaxasmio," or, as xul solar* succinctly
translates: upward, behind the onstreaming it
mooned,
that principle applies to the languages of the
southern hemisphere. in the northern
hemisphere (about whose ursprache volume
eleven contains very little information), the
primary unit is not the verb but the
monosyllabic adjective. nouns are formed by
stringing together adjectives. one does not say
"moon"; one says "aerial-bright above darkround"
or "soft-amberish-celestial" or any other
string. in this case, the complex of adjectives
corresponds to a real object, but that is purely
fortuitous. the literature of the northern
hemisphere (as in meinong's subsisting world)
is filled with ideal objects, called forth and
dissolved in an instant, as the poetry requires.
sometimes mere simultaneity creates them.
there are things composed of two terms, one
visual and the other auditory: the color of the
rising sun and the distant caw of a bird. there 
are things composed of many: the sun and
water against the swimmer's breast, the vague
shimmering pink one sees when one's eyes are
closed, the sensation of being swept along by a
river and also by morpheus. these objects of
the second degree may be combined with
others; the process, using certain abbreviations,
is virtually infinite. there are famous poems
composed of a single enormous word; this word
is a "poetic object" created by the poet. the fact
that no one believes in the reality expressed by
these nouns means, paradoxically, that there is
no limit to their number. the languages of
tlön's northern hemisphere possess all the
nouns of the indo-european languages—and
many, many more.
it is no exaggeration to say that the classical
culture outlines composed of a single
discipline—psychology—to which all others are
subordinate. i have said that the people of that
planet conceive the universe as a series of
mental processes that occur not in space but
rather successively, in time. spinoza endows his
inexhaustible deity with the attributes of spatial 
extension and of thought; no one in tlön would
understand the juxtaposition of the first, which
is typical only of certain states, and the
second— which is a perfect synonym for the
cosmos. or to put it another way: space is not
conceived as having duration in time. the
perception of a cloud of smoke on the horizon
and then the countryside on fire and then the
half-extinguished cigarette that produced the
scorched earth is considered an example of the
association of ideas.
this thoroughgoing monism, or idealism,
renders science null. to explain (or pass
judgment on) an event is to link it to another;
on tlön, that joining-together is a posterior
state of the subject, and can neither affect nor
illuminate the prior state. every mental state is
irreducible: the simple act of giving it a name—
i.e., of classifying it—introduces a distortion, a
"slant" or "bias." one might well deduce,
therefore, that on tlön there are no sciences—or
even any "systems of thought." the paradoxical
truth is that systems of thought do exist, almost
countless numbers of them. philosophies are
much like the nouns of the northern
hemisphere; the fact that every philosophy is by
definition a dialectical game, a philosophie des
als ob, has allowed them to proliferate. there
are systems upon systems that are incredible
but possessed of a pleasing architecture or a
certain agreeable sensationalism. the
metaphysicians of tlön seek not truth, or even
plausibility—they seek to amaze, astound. in
their view, metaphysics is a branch of the
literature of fantasy. they know that a system is
naught but the subordination of all the aspects
of the universe to one of those aspects— any
one of them. even the phrase "all the aspects"
should be avoided, because it implies the
impossible addition of the present instant and
all those instants that went before. nor is the
plural "those instants that went before"
legitimate, for it implies another impossible
operation.... one of the schools of philosophy
on tlön goes so far as to deny the existence of
time; it argues that the present is undefined and
indefinite, the future has no reality except as
present hope, and the past has no reality except 
as present recollection.2 [
2 russell (the
analysis of mind [1921], p. 159) posits that the
world was created only moments ago, filled
with human beings who "remember" an illusory
past.]
another school posits that all time has
already passed, so that our life is but the
crepuscular memory, or crepuscular reflection,
doubtlessly distorted and mutilated, of an
irrecoverable process. yet another claims that
the history of the universe—and in it, our lives
and every faintest detail of our lives—is the
handwriting of a subordinate god trying to
communicate with a demon. another, that the
universe might be compared to those
cryptograms in which not all the symbols count,
and only what happens every three hundred
nights is actually real. another, that while we
sleep here, we are awake somewhere else, so
that every man is in fact two men.
of all the doctrines of tlön, none has caused
more uproar than materialism. some thinkers
have formulated this philosophy (generally with
less clarity than zeal) as though putting forth a 
paradox. in order to make this inconceivable
thesis more easily understood, an eleventhcentury
heresiarch3 [
3 a "century," in keeping
with the duodecimal system in use on tlön, is a
period of 144 years.] conceived the sophism of
the nine copper coins, a paradox as
scandalously famous on tlön as the eleatic
aporiae to ourselves. there are many versions
of that "specious argument," with varying
numbers of coins and discoveries; the following
is the most common:
on tuesday, x is walking along a deserted
road and loses nine copper coins. on
thursday, y finds four coins in the road, their
luster somewhat dimmed by wednesday's
rain. on friday, z discovers three coins in the
road. friday morning x finds two coins on the
veranda of his house.
from this story the heresiarch wished to
deduce the reality—i.e., the continuity in time—
of those nine recovered coins. "it is absurd," he
said, "to imagine that four of the coins did not
exist from tuesday to thursday, three from
tuesday to friday afternoon, two from tuesday 
to friday morning. it is logical to think that
they in fact did exist—albeit in some secret way
that we are forbidden to understand—at every
moment of those three periods of time."
the language of tlön resisted formulating
this paradox; most people did not understand
it. the "common sense" school at first simply
denied the anecdote's veracity. they claimed it
was a verbal fallacy based on the reckless
employment of two neologisms, words
unauthorized by standard usage and foreign to
all rigorous thought: the two verbs "find" and
"lose," which, since they presuppose the
identity of the nine first coins and the nine
latter ones, entail a petitio principii. these
critics reminded their listeners that all nouns
(man, coin, thursday, wednesday, rain) have
only metaphoric value. they denounced the
misleading detail that "[the coins'] luster [was]
somewhat dimmed by wednesday's rain" as
presupposing what it attempted to prove: the
continuing existence of the four coins from
tuesday to thursday. they explained that
"equality" is one thing and "identity" another,
and they formulated a sort of reductio ad
absurdum —the hypothetical case of nine men
who on nine successive nights experience a
sharp pain.
would it not be absurd, they asked, to
pretend that the men had suffered one and the
same pain?4
they claimed that the heresiarch was
motivated by the blasphemous desire to
attribute the divine category being to a handful
of mere coins, and that he sometimes denied
plurality and sometimes did not.
they argued: if equality entailed identity,
one would have to admit that the nine coins
were a single coin.
incredibly, those refutations did not put an
end to the matter. a hundred years after the
problem had first been posed, a thinker no less
brilliant than the heresiarch, but of the
orthodox tradition, formulated a most daring
hypothesis. his happy conjecture was that there
is but a single subject; that indivisible subject is
every being in the universe, and the beings of
the universe are the organs and masks of the
deity. x is y and is above z. z discovers three
coins, then, because he remembers that x lost
them; x finds two coins on the veranda of his
house because he remembers that the others
have been found.... volume eleven suggests
that this idealistic pantheism triumphed over
all other schools of thought for three primary
reasons: first, because it repudiated solipsism;
second, because it left intact the psychological
foundation of the sciences; and third, because it
preserved the possibility of religion.
schopenhauer (passionate yet lucid
schopenhauer) formulates a very similar
doctrine in the first volume of his parerga und
paralipomena.
tlön's geometry is made up of two rather
distinct disciplines—visual geometry and tactile
geometry.
tactile geometry corresponds to our own,
and is subordinate to the visual. visual
geometry is based on the surface, not the point;
it has no parallel lines, and it claims that as
one's body moves through space, it modifies the
shapes that surround it. the basis of tlön's
arithmetic is the notion of indefinite numbers;
it stresses the importance of the concepts
"greater than" and "less than," which our own
mathematicians represent with the symbols >
and <. the people outliner taught that the act of
counting modifies the amount counted, turning
indefinites into définîtes. the fact that several
persons counting the same quantity come to the
same result is for the psychologists of tlön an
example of the association of ideas or of
memorization. —we must always remember
that on tlön, the subject of knowledge is one
and eternal.
within the sphere of literature, too, the idea
of the single subject is all-powerful. books are
rarely signed, nor does the concept of
plagiarism exist:
''today, one of tlön's religions contends,
platonically, that a certain pain, a certain
greenish-yellow color, a certain temperature,
and a certain sound are all the same, single
reality. all men, in the dizzying instant of
copulation, are the same man. all men who
speak a line of shakespeare are william
shakespeare.
it has been decided that all books are the
work of a single author who is timeless and
anonymous. literary criticism often invents
authors: it will take two dissimilar works—the
tao te ching and the 1001nights, for
instance—attribute them to a single author, and
then in all good conscience determine the
psychology of that most interesting homme de
lettres.
their books are also different from our own.
their fiction has but a single plot, with every
imaginable permutation. their works of a
philosophical nature invariably contain both
the thesis and the antithesis, the rigorous pro
and contra of every argument. a book that does
not contain its counter-book is considered
incomplete.
century upon century of idealism could
hardly have failed to influence reality. in the
most ancient regions of tlön one may, not
infrequently, observe the duplication of lost
objects: two persons are looking for a pencil;
the first person finds it, but says nothing; the
second finds a second pencil, no less real, but
more in keeping with his expectations. these
secondary objects are called hrönir, and they
are, though awkwardly so, slightly longer. until
recently, hrönir were the coincidental offspring
of distraction and forgetfulness. it is hard to
believe that they have been systematically
produced for only about a hundred years, but
that is what volume eleven tells us. the first
attempts were unsuccessful, but the modus
operandi is worth recalling: the warden of one
of the state prisons informed his prisoners that
there were certain tombs in the ancient bed of a
nearby river, and he promised that anyone who
brought in an important find would be set free.
for months before the excavation, the inmates
were shown photographs of what they were
going to discover. that first attempt proved that
hope and greed can be inhibiting; after a week's
work with pick and shovel, the only hrön
unearthed was a rusty wheel, dated some time
later than the date of the experiment. the
experiment was kept secret, but was repeated
afterward at four high schools. in three of them, 
the failure was virtually complete; in the fourth
(where the principal happened to die during the
early excavations), the students unearthed—or
produced—a gold mask, an archaic sword, two
or three clay amphorae, and the verdigris'd and
mutilated torso of a king with an inscription on
the chest that has yet to be deciphered. thus it
was discovered that no witnesses who were
aware of the experimental nature of the search
could be allowed near the site....
group research projects produce conflicting
finds; now individual, virtually spur-of-themoment
projects are preferred. the systematic
production of hrönir (says volume eleven) has
been of invaluable aid to archaeologists, making
it possible not only to interrogate but even to
modify the past, which is now no less plastic, no
less malleable than the future. a curious bit of
information: hrönir of the second and third
remove— hrönir derived from another hrön,
and hrönir derived from the hrön of a hrön—
exaggerate the aberrations of the first; those of
the fifth remove are almost identical; those of
the ninth can be confused with those of the
second; and those of the eleventh remove
exhibit a purity of line that even the originals do
not exhibit. the process is periodic: the hrönir
of the twelfth remove begin to degenerate.
sometimes stranger and purer than any hrön
is the ur —the thing produced by suggestion,
the object brought forth by hope. the
magnificent gold mask i mentioned is a
distinguished example.
things duplicate themselves on tlön; they
also tend to grow vague or "sketchy," and to
lose detail when they begin to be forgotten. the
classic example is the doorway that continued
to exist so long as a certain beggar frequented
it, but which was lost to sight when he died.
sometimes a few birds, a horse, have saved the
ruins of an amphitheater.
salto oriental, 1940
postscript----1947
i reproduce the article above exactly as it
appeared in the anthology of fantastic
literature (1940), the only changes being
editorial cuts of one or another metaphor and a 
tongue-in-cheek sort of summary that would
now be considered flippant. so many things
have happened since 1940—allow me to recall
some of them:
in march of 1941, a handwritten letter from
gunnar erfjord was discovered in a book by
hinton that had belonged to herbert ashe. the
envelope was postmarked ouro preto; the
mystery of tlön was fully elucidated by the
letter. it confirmed martinez estrada's
hypothesis: the splendid story had begun
sometime in the early seventeenth century, one
night in lucerne or london. a secret
benevolent society (which numbered among its
members dalgarno and, later, george berkeley)
was born; its mission: to invent a country. in its
vague initial program, there figured "hermetic
studies," philanthropy, and the kabbalah. (the
curious book by valentinus andrea dates from
that early period.) after several years of
confabulations and premature collaborative
drafts, the members of the society realized that
one generation would not suffice for creating
and giving full expression to a country. they
decided that each of the masters that belonged
to the society would select a disciple to carry on
the work. that hereditary arrangement was
followed; after an interim of two hundred years,
the persecuted fraternity turned up again in the
new world. in 1824, in memphis, tennessee,
one of the members had a conversation with the
reclusive millionaire ezra buckley. buckley,
somewhat contemptuously, let the man talk—
and then laughed at the modesty of the project.
he told the man that in america it was
nonsense to invent a country—what they ought
to do was invent a planet. to that giant of an
idea he added another, the brainchild of his
nihilism
buckley was a freethinker, a fatalist, and a
defender of slavery: the enormous enterprise
must be kept secret. at that time the twenty
volumes of the encyclopœdia britannica were
all the rage; buckley suggested a systematic
encyclopedia of the illusory planet. he would
bequeath to them his gold-veined mountains,
his navigable rivers, his prairies thundering
with bulls and buffalo, his negroes, his
brothels, and his dollars, he said, under one
condition: "the work shall make no pact with
the impostor jesus christ." buckley did not
believe in god, yet he wanted to prove to the
nonexistent god that mortals could conceive
and shape a world. buckley was poisoned in
baton rouge in 1828; in 1914 the society sent
its members (now numbering three hundred)
the final volume of the first encydopœdia of
tlön. it was published secretly: the forty
volumes that made up the work (the grandest
work of letters ever undertaken by humankind)
were to be the basis for another, yet more
painstaking work, to be written this time not in
english but in one of the languages of tlön.
that survey of an illusory world was tentatively
titled orbis tertius, and one of its modest
demiurges was herbert ashe—whether as agent
or colleague of gunnar erfjord, i cannot say.
his receipt of a copy of volume eleven seems to
favor the second possibility. but what about the
others?
 in 1942, the plot thickened. i recall with
singular clarity one of the first events that
occurred, something of whose premonitory
nature i believe i sensed even then. it took
place in an apartment on laprida, across the
street from a high, bright balcony that faced the
setting sun. princess faucigny lucinge had
received from poitiers a crate containing her
silver table service. from the vast innards of a
packing case emblazoned with international
customs stamps she removed, one by one, the
fine unmoving things: plate from utrecht and
paris chased with hard heraldic fauna, a
samovar. among the pieces, trembling softly
but perceptibly, like a sleeping bird, there
throbbed, mysteriously, a compass. the
princess did not recognize it. its blue needle
yearned toward magnetic north; its metal
casing was concave; the letters on its dial
belonged to one of the alphabets of tlön. that
was the first intrusion of the fantastic world of
tlön into the real world.
an unsettling coincidence made me a witness
to the second intrusion as well. this event took
place some months later, in a sort of a country
general-store-and-bar owned by a brazilian
man in the cuchilla negra. amorim* and i were
returning from sant'anna. there was a freshet
on the tacuarembó; as there was no way to
cross, we were forced to try (to try to endure,
that is) the rudimentary hospitality at hand.
the storekeeper set up some creaking cots
for us in a large storeroom clumsy with barrels
and stacks of leather. we lay down, but we were
kept awake until almost dawn by the
drunkenness of an unseen neighbor, who swung
between indecipherable streams of abuse and
loudly sung snatches of milongas—or snatches
of the same milonga, actually. as one can
imagine, we attributed the man's insistent
carrying-on to the storekeeper's fiery rotgut....
by shortly after daybreak, the man was dead in
the hallway. the hoarseness of his voice had
misled us—he was a young man. in his
delirium, several coins had slipped from his
wide gaucho belt, as had a gleaming metal cone
about a die's width in diameter. a little boy
tried to pick the cone-shaped object up, but in
vain; a full-grown man could hardly do it. i held
it for a few minutes in the palm of my hand; i 
recall that its weight was unbearable, and that
even after someone took it from me, the
sensation of terrible heaviness endured. i also
recall the neat circle it engraved in my flesh.
that evidence of a very small yet extremely
heavy object left an unpleasant aftertaste of fear
and revulsion. a paisano suggested that we
throw it in the swollen river. amorim purchased
it for a few pesos. no one knew anything about
the dead man, except that "he came from the
border." those small, incredibly heavy cones
(made of a metal not of this world) are an image
of the deity in certain tlönian religions.
here i end the personal portion of my
narration. the rest lies in every reader's
memory (if not his hope or fear). let it suffice to
recall, or mention, the subsequent events, with
a simple brevity of words which the general
public's concave memory will enrich or expand:
in 1944, an investigator from the nashville
american unearthed the forty volumes of the
first encyclopaedia of tlön in a memphis
library. to this day there is some disagreement
as to whether that discovery was accidental or 
consented to and guided by the directors of the
still-nebulous orbis tertius; the second
supposition is entirely plausible. some of the
unbelievable features of volume eleven (the
multiplication of hrönir, for example) have
been eliminated or muted in the memphis copy.
it seems reasonable to suppose that the cuts
obey the intent to set forth a world that is not
too incompatible with the real world. the
spread of tlönian objects through various
countries would complement that plan.
there is still, of course, the problem of the
material from which some objects are made.
at any rate, the international press made a
great hue and cry about this "find." handbooks,
anthologies, surveys, "literal translations,"
authorized and pirated reprints of mankind's
greatest masterpiece filled the world, and still
do. almost immediately, reality "caved in" at
more than one point. the truth is, it wanted to
cave in. ten years ago, any symmetry, any
system with an appearance of order—dialectical
materialism, anti-semitism, nazism—could
spellbind and hypnotize mankind. how could
the world not fall under the sway of tlön, how
could it not yield to the vast and minutely
detailed evidence of an ordered planet? it
would be futile to reply that reality is also
orderly. perhaps it is, but orderly in accordance
with divine laws (read: "inhuman laws") that we
can never quite manage to penetrate. tlön may
well be a labyrinth, but it is a labyrinth forged
by men, a labyrinth destined to be deciphered
by men.
contact with tlön, the habit of tlön, has
disintegrated this world. spellbound by tlön's
rigor, humanity has forgotten, and continues to
forget, that it is the rigor of chess masters, not
of angels. already tlön's (conjectural)
"primitive language" has filtered into our
schools; already the teaching of tlön's
harmonious history (filled with moving
episodes) has obliterated the history that
governed my own childhood; already a fictitious
past has supplanted in men's memories that
other past, of which we now know nothing
certain —not even that it is false. numismatics,
pharmacology, and archaeology have been
reformed. i understand that biology and
mathematics are also awaiting their next
avatar... a scattered dynasty of recluses has
changed the face of the earth—and their work
continues. if my projections are correct, a
hundred years from now someone will discover
the hundred volumes of the second
encyclopoedia of tlön.
at that, french and english and mere
spanish will disappear from the earth. the
world will be tlön. that makes very little
difference to me; through my quiet days in this
hotel in adrogué, i go on revising (though i
never intend to publish) an indecisive
translation in the style of quevedo of sir
thomas browne's urne buriall. 
the approach to al-mu'tasim
philip guedalla writes that the novel the
approach to al-mu'tasim, by the bombay
attorney mir bahadur ali, is "a rather
uncomfortable amalgam of one of those islamic
allegorical poems that seldom fail to interest
their translator and one of those detective
novels that inevitably surpass john h. watson's
and perfect the horror of life in the most
irreproachable rooming-houses of brighton."
earlier, mr. cecil roberts had detected in
bahadur's book "the dual, and implausible,
influence of wilkie collins and the illustrious
twelfth-century persian poet farïd al-dïn
attar"; the none-too-original guedalla repeats
this calm observation, though in choleric
accents. in essence, the two critics concur: both
point out the detective mechanism of the novel
and both speak of its mystical undercurrents.
that hybridity may inspire us to imagine some
similarity to chesterton; we shall soon discover
that no such similarity exists.
the first edition of the approach to al-
mu'tasim appeared in bombay in late 1932. its
paper was virtually newsprint; its cover
announced to the buyer that this was "the first
detective novel written by a native of bombay
city." within months, readers had bought out
four printings of a thousand copies each.
the bombay quarterly review, the
bombay gazette, the calcutta review, the
hindustan review of allahabad, and the
calcutta englishman rained dithyrambs upon
it. it was then that bahadur published an
illustrated edition he titled the conversation
with the man called al-mu'tasim and coyly
subtitled a game with shifting mirrors. that
edition has just been reprinted in london by
victor gollancz with a foreword by dorothy l.
sayers, but with the (perhaps merciful)
omission of the illustrations. i have that book
before me; i have not been able to come upon
the first, which i suspect is greatly superior. i
am supported in this conclusion by an appendix
that details the fundamental difference between
the original, 1932, version and the edition of
1934. before examining the work (and
discussing it), i think it would be a good idea to
give a brief general outline of the novel.
its visible protagonist, whose name we are
never told, is a law student in bombay. in the
most blasphemous way he has renounced the
islamic faith of his parents, but as the tenth
night of the moon of muharram wanes he finds
himself at the center of a riot, a street battle
between muslims and hindus. it is a night of
tambours and invocations; through the inimical
multitude, the great paper baldachins of the
muslim procession make their way. a hindu
brick flies from a rooftop nearby; someone
buries a dagger in a belly; someone—a muslim?
a hindu?—dies and is trampled underfoot.
three thousand men do battle—cane against
revolver, obscenity against imprecation, god
the indivisible against the gods. in a sort of
daze, the free-thinking law student enters the
fray. with desperate hands, he kills (or thinks
he has killed) a hindu. thundering, horseborne,
half asleep, the sirkar police intervene
with impartial lashes of their crops. virtually
under the hooves of the horses, the student
makes his escape, fleeing toward the outermost
suburbs of the city. he crosses two railroad
tracks, or twice crosses the same track. he
scales the wall of an unkempt garden, which has
a circular tower toward the rear. a "lean and
evil mob of moon-coloured hounds" emerges
from the black rosebushes. fearing for his life,
the law student seeks refuge in the tower. he
climbs an iron ladder—some rungs are
missing—and on the flat roof, which has a
pitch-black hole in the center, he comes upon a
filthy man squatting in the moonlight, pouring
forth a vigorous stream of urine. this man
confides to the law student that it is his
profession to steal the gold teeth from the
cadavers the farsees bring, swaddled in white,
to that tower. he makes several further
gruesome remarks and then he mentions that it
has been fourteen nights since he purified
himself with ox dung. he speaks with obvious
anger about certain gujarati horse thieves,
"eaters of dog meat and lizard meat—men, in a
word, as vile as you and i." the sky is growing
light; there is a lowering circle of fat vultures in 
the air. the law student, exhausted, falls asleep;
when he awakens, the sun now high, the thief
has disappeared. a couple of cigarettes from
trichinopolis have also disappeared, as have a
few silver rupees. in the face of the menace that
looms from the previous night, the law student
decides to lose himself in india. he reflects that
he has shown himself capable of killing an
idolater, yet incapable of knowing with any
certainty whether the muslim possesses more of
truth than the idolater does. the name gujarat
has remained with him, as has that of a malkasansi
(a woman of the caste of thieves) in
palanpur, a woman favored by the imprecations
and hatred of the corpse-robber. the law
student reasons that the wrath and hatred of a
man so thoroughly despicable is the equivalent
of a hymn of praise. he resolves, therefore,
though with little hope, to find this woman. he
performs his prayers, and then he sets out, with
sure, slow steps, on the long path. that brings
the reader to the end of the second chapter of
the book.
it would be impossible to trace the
adventures of the remaining nineteen chapters.
there is a dizzying pullulation of dramatis
personae —not to mention a biography that
seems to catalog every motion of the human
spirit (from iniquity to mathematical
speculation) and a pilgrimage that covers the
vast geography of hindustan. the story begun
in bombay continues in the lowlands of
palanpur, pauses for a night and a day at the
stone gate of bikanir, narrates the death of a
blind astrologer in a cesspool in benares,
conspires in the multiform palace at katmandu,
prays and fornicates in the pestilential stench of
the machua bazaar in calcutta, watches the day
being born out of the sea from a scribe's stool in
madras, watches the evening decline into the
sea from a balcony in the state of travancor,
gutters and dies in hindapur, and closes its
circle of leagues and years in bombay again, a
few steps from the garden of those "mooncoloured"
hounds. the plot itself is this: a man
(the unbelieving, fleeing law student we have
met) falls among people of the lowest, vilest
sort and accommodates himself to them, in a
kind of contest of iniquity. suddenly—with the
miraculous shock of crusoe when he sees that
human footprint in the sand—the law student
perceives some mitigation of the evil: a moment
of tenderness, of exaltation, of silence, in one of
the abominable men. "it was as though a more
complex interlocutor had spoken." he knows
that the wretch with whom he is conversing is
incapable of that momentary decency; thus the
law student hypothesizes that the vile man
before him has reflected a friend, or the friend
of a friend.
rethinking the problem, he comes to a
mysterious conclusion: somewhere in the
world there is a man from whom this clarity,
this brightness, emanates; somewhere in the
world there is a man who is equal to this
brightness. the law student resolves to devote
his life to searching out that man.
thus we begin to see the book's general
scheme: the insatiable search for a soul by
means of the delicate glimmerings or reflections
this soul has left in others—at first, the faint
trace of a smile or a word; toward the last, the 
varied and growing splendors of intelligence,
imagination, and goodness. the more closely
the men interrogated by the law student have
known al-mu'tasim, the greater is their portion
of divinity, but the reader knows that they
themselves are but mirrors. a technical
mathematical formula is applicable here:
bahadur's heavily freighted novel is an
ascending progression whose final term is the
sensed or foreapprehended "man called almu'tasim."
the person immediately preceding
al-mu'tasim is a persian bookseller of great
courtesy and felicity; the man preceding the
bookseller is a saint-----after all those years, the
law student comes to a gallery "at the end of
which there is a doorway and a tawdry curtain
of many beads, and behind that, a glowing
light." the law student claps his hands once,
twice, and calls out for al-mu'tasim. a man's
voice—the incredible voice of al-mu'tasim—
bids the law student enter. the law student
draws back the bead curtain and steps into the
room. at that point, the novel ends.
i believe i am correct in saying that if an
author is to pull off such a plot, he is under two
obligations: first, he must invent a variety of
prophetic signs; second, he must not allow the
hero prefigured by those signs to become a
mere phantasm or convention. bahadur meets
the first obligation; i am not sure to what extent
he meets the second. in other words: the unheard
and unseen al-mu'tasim should impress
us as being a real person, not some jumble of
vapid superlatives. in the 1932 version of the
novel, the supernatural notes are few and far
between; "the man called al-mu'tasim" has his
touch of symbolism, but he possesses
idiosyncratic personal traits as well.
unfortunately, that commendable literary
practice was not to be followed in the second
edition. in the 1934 version—the edition i have
before me even now—the novel sinks into
allegory: al-mu'tasim is an emblem of god, and
the detailed itineraries of the hero are somehow
the progress of the soul in its ascent to mystical
plenitude. there are distressing details: a black
jew from cochin, describing al-mu'tasim, says
that his skin is dark; a christian says that he
stands upon a tower with his arms outspread; a
red lama recalls him as seated "like that image
which i carved from yak ghee and worshipped
in the monastery at tashilhumpo." those
declarations are an attempt to suggest a single,
unitary god who molds himself to the dissimilarities
of humankind. in my view, that
notion is not particularly exciting. i cannot say
the same for another idea, however: the idea
that the almighty is also in search of someone,
and that someone, in search of a yet superior
(or perhaps simply necessary, albeit equal)
someone, and so on, to the end—or better yet,
the endlessness—of time. or perhaps
cyclically. the etymological meaning of "almu'tasim"
(the name of that eighth abbasid
king who won eight battles, engendered eight
sons and eight daughters, left eight thousand
slaves, and reigned for a period of eight years,
eight moons, and eight days) is "he who goes in
quest of aid." in the 1932 version of the novel,
the fact that the object of the pilgrimage was
himself a pilgrim cleverly justified the difficulty
of finding al-mu'tasim; in the 1934 edition, that 
fact leads to the extravagant theology i have
described. mir bahadur ali, as we have seen, is
incapable of resisting that basest of art's
temptations: the temptation to be a genius.
i reread what i have just written and i fear i
have not made sufficiently explicit the virtues of
this book. it has some quite civilized features;
for example, that argument in chapter xix in
which the law student (and the reader) sense
that one of the participants in the debate is a
friend of al-mu'tasim—the man does not rebut
another man's sophisms "in order not to gloat
at the other man's defeat."
it is generally understood that a modern-day
book may honorably be based upon an older
one, especially since, as dr. johnson observed,
no man likes owing anything to his
contemporaries. the repeated but irrelevant
points of congruence between joyce's ulysses
and homer's odyssey continue to attract
(though i shall never understand why) the
dazzled admiration of critics. the points of
congruence between bahadur's novel and farîd
al-dîn attar's classic conference of the birds
meet with the no less mysterious praise of
london, and even of allahabad and calcutta.
there are other debts, as well. one investigator
has documented certain analogies between the
first scene of the novel and kipling's story
"on the city wall"; bahadur acknowledges
these echoes, but claims that it would be most
unusual if two portraits of the tenth night of
muharram should not agree.... with greater
justice, eliot recalls that never once in the
seventy cantos of spenser's unfinished allegory
the faerie queene does the heroine gloriana
appear—an omission for which richard william
church had criticized the work. i myself, in all
humility, would point out a distant, possible
precursor: the kabbalist isaac luria, who in
jerusalem, in the sixteenth century, revealed
that the soul of an ancestor or teacher may
enter into the soul of an unhappy or
unfortunate man, to comfort or instruct him.
that type of metempsychosis is called ibbûr.
'in the course of this article, i have referred
to the manttq al-tatr, or conference [perhaps
"parliament"] of the birds, by the persian
mystic poet farïd al-dïn abï hämid
muhammad ben ibrahim (known as attãr, or
"perfumer"), who was murdered by the soldiers
under tuluy, the son of genghis khan, when
nishapur was sacked. perhaps i should
summarize that poem. one of the splendid
feathers of the distant king of the birds, the
sïmurgh, falls into the center of china; other
birds, weary with the present state of anarchy,
resolve to find this king. they know that the
name of their king means "thirty birds"; they
know that his palace is in the mountains of kaf,
the mountains that encircle the earth.
the birds undertake the almost infinite
adventure. they cross seven wadis or seven
seas; the penultimate of these is called vertigo;
the last, annihilation. many of the pilgrims
abandon the quest; others perish on the
journey. at the end, thirty birds, purified by
their travails, come to the mountain on which
the simurgh lives, and they look upon their king
at last: they see that they are the simurgh and
that the sïmurgh is each, and all, of them.
(plotinus, too, in the enneads [v, 8, 4], remarks 
upon a paradisal extension of the principle of
identity: "everything in the intelligible heavens
is everywhere. any thing is all things. the sun is
all stars, and each star is all stars and the sun.")
the manttqal-tair has been translated into
french by garcin de tassy, into english by
edward fitzgerald; for this note i have
consulted richard burton's 1001 nights, vol.
x, and the margaret smith study entitled the
persian mystics: attar (1932).
the parallels between this poem and mir
bahadur ali's novel are not overdone. in
chapter xx, a few words attributed by a persian
bookseller to al-mu'tasim are perhaps an
expansion of words spoken by the hero; that
and other ambiguous similarities may signal the
identity of the seeker and the sought; they may
also signal that the sought has already
influenced the seeker. another chapter suggests
that al-mu'tasim is the "hindu" that the law
student thinks he murdered. 
pierre menard, author of the quixote
for silvina ocampo
the visible œuvre left by this novelist can be
easily and briefly enumerated; unpardonable,
therefore, are the omissions and additions
perpetrated by mme. henri bachelier in a
deceitful catalog that a certain newspaper,
whose protestant leanings are surely no secret,
has been so inconsiderate as to inflict upon that
newspaper's deplorable readers—few and
calvinist (if not masonic and circumcised)
though they be.
menard's true friends have greeted that
catalog with alarm, and even with a degree of
sadness. one might note that only yesterday
were we gathered before his marmoreal place of
rest, among the dreary cypresses, and already
error is attempting to tarnish his bright
memory.... most decidedly, a brief rectification
is imperative.
i am aware that it is easy enough to call my
own scant authority into question. i hope,
nonetheless, that i shall not be prohibited from 
mentioning two high testimonials. the
baroness de bacourt(at whose unforgettable
vendredis i had the honor to meet the
mourned-for poet) has been so kind as to
approve the lines that follow. likewise, the
countess de bagnoregio, one of the rarest and
most cultured spirits of the principality of
monaco (now of pittsburgh, pennsylvania,
following her recent marriage to the
international philanthropist simon kautzsch—a
man, it grieves me to say, vilified and slandered
by the victims of his disinterested operations),
has sacrificed "to truth and to death" (as she
herself has phrased it) the noble reserve that is
the mark of her distinction, and in an open
letter, published in the magazine luxe, bestows
upon me her blessing. those commendations
are sufficient, i should think.
i have said that the visible product of
menard's pen is easily enumerated. having
examined his personal files with the greatest
care, i have established that his body of work
consists of the following pieces:
a) a symbolist sonnet that appeared twice
(with variants) in the review la conque (in the
numbers for march and october, 1899);
b) a monograph on the possibility of
constructing a poetic vocabulary from concepts
that are neither synonyms nor periphrastic
locutions for the concepts that inform common
speech, "but are, rather, ideal objects created by
convention essentially for the needs of
poetry"(nîmes,1901);
c) a monograph on "certain connections or
affinities" between the philosophies of
descartes, leibniz, and john
wilkins(nîmes,1903);
d) a monograph on leibniz' characteristica
universalis (nîmes,1904);
e) a technical article on the possibility of
enriching the game of chess by eliminating one
of the rook's pawns (menard proposes,
recommends, debates, and finally rejects this
innovation);
f) a monograph on ramon lull's ars magna
generalis (nîmes,1906);
g) a translation, with introduction and notes,
of ruy lópez de segura's libro de la invención
liberal y arte del juego de la xedrez (paris,
1907);
h) drafts of a monograph on george boole's
symbolic logic;
i) a study of the essential metrical rules of
french prose, illustrated with examples taken
from saint-simon (revuedes langues romanes,
montpellier, october 1909);
j) a reply to luc durtain (who had countered
that no such rules existed), illustrated with
examples taken from luc durtain (revuedes
langues romanes, montpellier, december
1909);
k) a manuscript translation of quevedo's
aguja de navegar cultos, titled la boussole des
precious;
l) a foreword to the catalog of an exhibit of
lithographs by carolus hourcade(nîmes,1914);
m) a work entitled les problèmes d'un
problème (paris,1917), which discusses in
chronological order the solutions to the famous
problem of achilles and the tortoise (two
editions of this work have so far appeared; the
second bears an epigraph consisting of leibniz' 
advice "ne craignez point, monsieur, la tortue,"
and brings up to date the chapters devoted to
russell and descartes);
n) a dogged analysis of the "syntactical
habits" of toulet (n.r.f., march 1921)
(menard, i recall, affirmed that censure and
praise were sentimental operations that bore
not the slightest resemblance to criticism);
o) a transposition into alexandrines of paul
valéry's cimetière marin (n.r.f., january
1928);
p) a diatribe against paul valéry, in jacques
reboul's feuilles pour la suppression de la
réalité (which diatribe, i might add
parenthetically, states the exact reverse of
menard's true opinion of valéry; valéry
understood this, and the two men's friendship
was never imperiled);
q) a "definition" of the countess de
bagnoregio, in the "triumphant volume" (the
phrase is that of another contributor, gabriele
d'annunzio) published each year by that lady to
rectify the inevitable biases of the popular press
and to present "to the world and all of italy" a 
true picture of her person, which was so
exposed (by reason of her beauty and her
bearing) to erroneous and/or hasty
interpretations;
r) a cycle of admirable sonnets dedicated to
the baroness de bacourt(1934); s) a
handwritten list of lines of poetry that owe their
excellence to punctuation.1
[
1 mme. henri bachelier also lists a literal
translation of quevedo's literal translation of st.
francis de sales's introduction à la vie dévote.
in pierre menard's library there is no trace of
such a work. this must be an instance of one of
our friend's droll jokes, misheard or
misunderstood.]
this is the full extent (save for a few vague
sonnets of occasion destined for mme. henri
bachelier's hospitable, or greedy, album des
souvenirs) of the visible lifework of pierre
menard, in proper chronological order. i shall
turn now to the other, the subterranean, the
interminably heroic production—the œuvre
nonpareil, the œuvre that must remain—for
such are our human limitations!—unfinished. 
this work, perhaps the most significant writing
of our time, consists of the ninth and thirtyeighth
chapters of part i of don quixote and a
fragment of chapter xxii. i know that such a
claim is on the face of it absurd; justifying that
"absurdity" shall be the primary object of this
note.2
[
2. i did, i might say, have the secondary
purpose of drawing a small sketch of the figure
of pierre menard—but how dare i compete with
the gilded pages i am told the baroness de
bacourt is even now preparing, or with the
delicate sharp crayon of carolus hourcade?]
two texts, of distinctly unequal value,
inspired the undertaking. one was that
philological fragment by novalis—number 2005
in the dresden edition, to be precise—which
outlines the notion of total identification with a
given author. the other was one of those
parasitic books that set christ on a boulevard,
hamlet on la cannabière, or don quixote on
wall street. like every man of taste, menard
abominated those pointless travesties, which,
menard would say, were good for nothing but
occasioning a plebeian delight in anachronism
or (worse yet) captivating us with the
elementary notion that all times and places are
the same, or are different. it might be more
interesting, he thought, though of contradictory
and superficial execution, to attempt what
daudet had so famously suggested: conjoin in a
single figure (tartarin, say) both the ingenious
gentleman don quixote and his squire-----
those who have insinuated that menard
devoted his life to writing a contemporary
quixote besmirch his illustrious memory. pierre
menard did not want to compose another
quixote, which surely is easy enough—he
wanted to compose the quixote. nor, surely,
need one have to say that his goal was never a
mechanical transcription of the original; he had
no intention of copying it. his admirable
ambition was to produce a number of pages
which coincided—word for word and line for
line—with those of miguel de cervantes.
"my purpose is merely astonishing," he wrote
me on september 30, 1934, from bayonne. "the
final term of a theological or metaphysical
proof—the world around us, or god, or chance,
or universal forms—is no more final, no more
uncommon, than my revealed novel. the sole
difference is that philosophers publish pleasant
volumes containing the intermediate stages of
their work, while i am resolved to suppress
those stages of my own." and indeed there is
not a single draft to bear witness to that yearslong
labor.
initially, menard's method was to be
relatively simple: learn spanish, return to
catholicism, fight against the moor or turk,
forget the history of europe from 1602 to
1918— be miguel de cervantes. pierre menard
weighed that course (i know he pretty
thoroughly mastered seventeenth-century
castilian) but he discarded it as too easy. too
impossible, rather!, the reader will say. quite
so, but the undertaking was impossible from
the outset, and of all the impossible ways of
bringing it about, this was the least interesting.
to be a popular novelist of the seventeenth
century in the twentieth seemed to menard to
be a diminution. being, somehow, cervantes,
and arriving thereby at the quixote—that
looked to menard less challenging (and
therefore less interesting) than continuing to be
pierre menard and coming to the quixote
through the experiences of pierre menard. (it
was that conviction, by the way, that obliged
him to leave out the autobiographical foreword
to part ii of the novel. including the prologue
would have meant creating another character—
"cervantes"—and also presenting quixote
through that character's eyes, not pierre
menard's. menard, of course, spurned that easy
solution.) "the task i have undertaken is not in
essence difficult," i read at another place in that
letter. "if i could just be immortal, i could do
it."
shall i confess that i often imagine that he
did complete it, and that i read the quixote—
the entire quixote—as if menard had conceived
it? a few nights ago, as i was leafing through
chapter xxvi (never attempted by menard), i
recognized our friend's style, could almost hear
his voice in this marvelous phrase: "the nymphs
of the rivers, the moist and grieving echo." that 
wonderfully effective linking of one adjective of
emotion with another of physical description
brought to my mind a line from shakespeare,
which i recall we discussed one afternoon:
where a malignant and a turban'd turk...
why the quixote? my reader may ask. that
choice, made by a spaniard, would not have
been incomprehensible, but it no doubt is so
when made by a symboliste from nîmes, a
devotee essentially of poe—who begat
baudelaire, who begat mallarmé, who begat
valéry, who begat m. edmond teste. the letter
mentioned above throws some light on this
point. "the quixote? explains menard, deeply
interests me, but does not seem to me—
comment dirai-je? — inevitable. i cannot
imagine the universe without poe's ejaculation
"ah, bear in mind this garden was enchanted!"
or the bateauivre or the ancient mariner, but i
know myself able to imagine it without the
quixote. (i am speaking, of course, of my
personal ability, not of the historical resonance
of those works.) the quixote is a contingent
work; the quixote is not necessary. i can
premeditate committing it to writing, as it
were—i can write it—without falling into a
tautology. at the age of twelve or thirteen i read
it—perhaps read it cover to cover, i cannot
recall. since then, i have carefully reread
certain chapters, those which, at least for the
moment, i shall not attempt. i have also
glanced at the interludes, the comedies, the
galatea, the exemplary novels, the no doubt
laborious travails of persiles and sigismundo,
and the poetic voyage to parnassus.... my
general recollection of the quixote, simplified
by forgetfulness and indifference, might well be
the equivalent of the vague foreshadowing of a
yet unwritten book. given that image (which no
one can in good conscience deny me), my
problem is, without the shadow of a doubt,
much more difficult than cervantes'. my
obliging predecessor did not spurn the
collaboration of chance; his method of
composition for the immortal book was a bit à
la diable, and he was often swept along by the
inertiae of the language and the imagination. i
have assumed the mysterious obligation to
reconstruct, word for word, the novel that for
him was spontaneous. this game of solitaire i
play is governed by two polar rules: the first
allows me to try out formal or psychological
variants; the second forces me to sacrifice them
to the "original" text and to come, by irrefutable
arguments, to those eradications.... in addition
to these first two artificial constraints there is
another, inherent to the project. composing the
quixote in the early seventeenth century was a
reasonable, necessary, perhaps even inevitable
undertaking; in the early twentieth, it is
virtually impossible. not for nothing have three
hundred years elapsed, freighted with the most
complex events. among those events, to
mention but one, is the quixote itself.
in spite of those three obstacles, menard's
fragmentary quixote is more subtle than
cervantes'.
cervantes crudely juxtaposes the humble
provincial reality of his country against the
fantasies of the romance, while menard chooses
as his "reality" the land of carmen during the
century that saw the battle of lepanto and the 
plays of lope de vega. what burlesque brushstrokes
of local color that choice would have
inspired in a maurice barresor a rodriguez
larreta*! yet menard, with perfect naturalness,
avoids them. in his work, there are no gypsy
goings-on or conquistadors or mystics or philip
us or autos da fé. heignores, overlooks — or
banishes — local color. that disdain posits a
new meaning for the "historical novel." that
disdain condemns salammbô, with no
possibility of appeal.
no less amazement visits one when the
chapters are considered in isolation. as an
example, let us look at part i, chapter xxxviii,
"which treats of the curious discourse that don
quixote made on the subject of arms and
letters." it is a matter of common knowledge
that in that chapter, don quixote (like quevedo
in the analogous, and later, passage in la hora
de todos) comes down against letters and in
favor of arms. cervantes was an old soldier;
from him, the verdict is understandable. but
that pierre menard's don quixote—a
contemporary of la trahison des clercs and
bertrand russell—should repeat those cloudy
sophistries! mme. bachelier sees in them an
admirable (typical) subordination of the author
to the psychology of the hero; others (lacking all
perspicacity) see them as a transcription of the
quixote; the baroness de bacourt, as influenced
by nietzsche. to that third interpretation
(which i consider irrefutable), i am not certain i
dare to add a fourth, though it agrees very well
with the almost divine modesty of pierre
menard: his resigned or ironic habit of putting
forth ideas that were the exact opposite of those
he actually held. (we should recall that diatribe
against paul valéry in the ephemeral surrealist
journal edited by jacques reboul.) the
cervantes text and the menard text are verbally
identical, but the second is almost infinitely
richer. (more ambiguous, his detractors will
say—but ambiguity is richness.) it is a
revelation to compare the don quixote of pierre
menard with that of miguel de cervantes.
cervantes, for example, wrote the following
(part i, chapter ix): …truth, whose mother is
history, rival of time, depository of deeds,
witness of the past, exemplar and adviser to the
present, and the future's counselor.
this catalog of attributes, written in the
seventeenth century, and written by the
"ingenious layman" miguel de cervantes, is
mere rhetorical praise of history. menard, on
the other hand, writes: ... truth, whose mother
is history, rival of time, depository of deeds,
witness of the past, exemplar and adviser to the
present, and the future's counselor.
history, the mother of truth!—the idea is
staggering. menard, a contemporary of william
james, defines history not as a delving into
reality but as the very fount of reality. historical
truth, for menard, is not "what happened"; it is
what we believe happened. the final phrases—
exemplar and adviser to the present, and the
future's counselor—are brazenly pragmatic.
the contrast in styles is equally striking. the
archaic style of menard— who is, in addition,
not a native speaker of the language in which he
writes—is somewhat affected. not so the style of
his precursor, who employs the spanish of his
time with complete naturalness. 
there is no intellectual exercise that is not
ultimately pointless. a philosophical doctrine
is, at first, a plausible description of the
universe; the years go by, and it is a mere
chapter—if not a paragraph or proper noun—in
the history of philosophy. in literature, that
"falling by the wayside," that loss of "relevance,"
is even better known. the quixote, menard
remarked, was first and foremost a pleasant
book; it is now an occasion for patriotic toasts,
grammatical arrogance, obscene deluxe
editions. fame is a form — perhaps the worst
form — of incomprehension.
those nihilistic observations were not new;
what was remarkable was the decision that
pierre menard derived from them. he resolved
to anticipate the vanity that awaits all the labors
of mankind; he undertook a task of infinite
complexity, a task futile from the outset. he
dedicated his scruples and his nights "lit by
midnight oil" to repeating in a foreign tongue a
book that already existed. his drafts were
endless; he stubbornly corrected, and he ripped
up thousands of handwritten pages. he would 
allow no one to see them, and took care that
they not survive him.3
[
3 i recall his square-ruled notebooks, his
black crossings-out, his peculiar typographical
symbols, and his insect-like handwriting. in the
evening, he liked to go out for walks on the
outskirts of nîmes; he would often carry along a
notebook and make a cheery bonfire.]
in vain have i attempted to reconstruct
them.
i have reflected that it is legitimate to see the
"final" quixote as a kind of palimpsest, in which
the traces—faint but not undecipherable—of our
friend's "previous" text must shine through.
unfortunately, only a second pierre menard,
reversing the labors of the first, would be able
to exhume and revive those troys....
"thinking, meditating, imagining," he also
wrote me, "are not anomalous acts—they are
the normal respiration of the intelligence. to
glorify the occasional exercise of that function,
to treasure beyond price ancient and foreign
thoughts, to recall with incredulous awe what
some doctor universalis thought, is to confess 
our own languor, or our own barbarie. every
man should be capable of all ideas, and i believe
that in the future he shall be."
menard has (perhaps unwittingly) enriched
the slow and rudimentary art of reading by
means of a new technique—the technique of
deliberate anachronism and fallacious
attribution. that technique, requiring infinite
patience and concentration, encourages us to
read the odyssey as though it came after the
aeneid, to read mme. henri bachelier's le
jardin du centaure as though it were written by
mme. henri bachelier. this technique fills the
calmest books with adventure. attributing the
imitatio christi to louis ferdinandcélineor
james joyce—is that not sufficient renovation
of those faint spiritual admonitions?
nîmes, 1939
. 
the circular ruins
and if he left off dreaming about you ... ?
through the looking-glass, vi
no one saw him slip from the boat in the
unanimous night, no one saw the bamboo
canoe as it sank into the sacred mud, and yet
within days there was no one who did not know
that the taciturn man had come there from the
south, and that his homeland was one of those
infinite villages that lie up-river, on the violent
flank of the mountain, where the language of
the zend is uncontaminated by greek and
where leprosy is uncommon. but in fact the
gray man had kissed the mud, scrambled up the
steep bank (without pushing back, probably
without even feeling, the sharp-leaved
bulrushes that slashed his flesh), and dragged
himself, faint and bloody, to the circular
enclosure, crowned by the stone figure of a
horse or tiger, which had once been the color of
fire but was now the color of ashes. that ring
was a temple devoured by an ancient holocaust; 
now, the malarial jungle had profaned it and its
god went unhonored by mankind. the foreigner
lay down at the foot of the pedestal.
he was awakened by the sun high in the sky.
he examined his wounds and saw, without
astonishment, that they had healed; he closed
his pale eyes and slept, not out of any weakness
of the flesh but out of willed determination. he
knew that this temple was the place that his
unconquerable plan called for; he knew that the
unrelenting trees had not succeeded in
strangling the ruins of another promising
temple downriver—like this one, a temple to
dead, incinerated gods; he knew that his
immediate obligation was to sleep. about
midnight he was awakened by the inconsolable
cry of a bird. prints of unshod feet, a few figs,
and a jug of water told him that the men of the
region had respectfully spied upon his sleep and
that they sought his favor, or feared his magic.
he felt the coldness of fear, and he sought out a
tomblike niche in the crumbling wall, where he
covered himself with unknown leaves.
the goal that led him on was not impossible, 
though it was clearly supernatural: he wanted
to dream a man. he wanted to dream him
completely, in painstaking detail, and impose
him upon reality. this magical objective had
come to fill his entire soul; if someone had
asked him his own name, or inquired into any
feature of his life till then, he would not have
been able to answer. the uninhabited and
crumbling temple suited him, for it was a
minimum of visible world; so did the proximity
of the woodcutters, for they saw to his frugal
needs. the rice and fruit of their tribute were
nourishment enough for his body, which was
consecrated to the sole task of sleeping and
dreaming.
at first, his dreams were chaotic; a little
later, they became dialectical. the foreigner
dreamed that he was in the center of a circular
amphitheater, which was somehow the ruined
temple; clouds of taciturn students completely
filled the terraces of seats. the faces of those
farthest away hung at many centuries' distance
and at a cosmic height, yet they were absolutely
clear. the man lectured on anatomy,
cosmography, magic; the faces listened
earnestly, intently, and attempted to respond
with understanding—as though they sensed the
importance of that education that would
redeem one of them from his state of hollow
appearance and insert him into the real world.
the man, both in sleep and when awake,
pondered his phantasms' answers; he did not
allow himself to be taken in by impostors, and
he sensed in certain perplexities a growing
intelligence. he was seeking a soul worthy of
taking its place in the universe.
on the ninth or tenth night, he realized (with
some bitterness) that nothing could be expected
from those students who passively accepted his
teachings, but only from those who might
occasionally, in a reasonable way, venture an
objection. the first—the accepting—though
worthy of affection and a degree of sympathy,
would never emerge as individuals; the latter—
those who sometimes questioned—had a bit
more préexistence. one afternoon (afternoons
now paid their tribute to sleep as well; now the
man was awake no more than two or three 
hours around daybreak) he dismissed the vast
illusory classroom once and for all and retained
but a single pupil—a taciturn, sallow-skinned
young man, at times intractable, with sharp
features that echoed those of the man that
dreamed him. the pupil was not disconcerted
for long by the elimination of his classmates;
after only a few of the private classes, his
progress amazed his teacher. yet disaster would
not be forestalled. one day the man emerged
from sleep as though from a viscous desert,
looked up at the hollow light of the evening
(which for a moment he confused with the light
of dawn), and realized that he had not dreamed.
all that night and the next day, the unbearable
lucidity of insomnia harried him, like a hawk.
he went off to explore the jungle, hoping to tire
himself; among the hemlocks he managed no
more than a few intervals of feeble sleep,
fleetingly veined with the most rudimentary of
visions—useless to him. he reconvened his
class, but no sooner had he spoken a few brief
words of exhortation than the faces blurred,
twisted, and faded away. 
in his almost perpetual state of wakefulness,
tears of anger burned the man's old eyes.
he understood that the task of molding the
incoherent and dizzying stuff that dreams are
made of is the most difficult work a man can
undertake, even if he fathom all the enigmas of
the higher and lower spheres— much more
difficult than weaving a rope of sand or minting
coins of the faceless wind. he understood that
initial failure was inevitable. he swore to put
behind him the vast hallucination that at first
had drawn him off the track, and he sought
another way to approach his task. before he
began, he devoted a month to recovering the
strength his delirium had squandered. he
abandoned all premeditation of dreaming, and
almost instantly managed to sleep for a fair
portion of the day. the few times he did dream
during this period, he did not focus on his
dreams; he would wait to take up his task again
until the disk of the moon was whole. then, that
evening, he purified himself in the waters of the
river, bowed down to the planetary gods,
uttered those syllables of a powerful name that 
it is lawful to pronounce, and laid himself down
to sleep. almost immediately he dreamed a
beating heart.
he dreamed the heart warm, active, secret—
about the size of a closed fist, a garnet-colored
thing inside the dimness of a human body that
was still faceless and sexless; he dreamed it,
with painstaking love, for fourteen brilliant
nights. each night he perceived it with greater
clarity, greater certainty. he did not touch it; he
only witnessed it, observed it, corrected it,
perhaps, with his eyes. he perceived it, he lived
it, from many angles, many distances. on the
fourteenth night, he stroked the pulmonary
artery with his forefinger, and then the entire
heart, inside and out. and his inspection made
him proud. he deliberately did not sleep the
next night; then he took up the heart again,
invoked the name of a planet, and set about
dreaming another of the major organs. before
the year was out he had reached the skeleton,
the eyelids.
the countless hairs of the body were perhaps
the most difficult task. the man had dreamed a 
fully fleshed man—a stripling—but this youth
did not stand up or speak, nor could it open its
eyes. night after night, the man dreamed the
youth asleep.
in the cosmogonies of the gnostics, the
demiurges knead up a red adam who cannot
manage to stand; as rude and inept and
elementary as that adam of dust was the adam
of dream wrought from the sorcerer's nights.
one afternoon, the man almost destroyed his
creation, but he could not bring himself to do it.
(he'd have been better off if he had.) after
making vows to all the deities of the earth and
the river, he threw himself at the feet of the idol
that was perhaps a tiger or perhaps a colt, and
he begged for its untried aid. that evening, at
sunset, the statue filled his dreams. in the
dream it was alive, and trembling—yet it was
not the dread-inspiring hybrid form of horse
and tiger it had been. it was, instead, those two
vehement creatures plus bull, and rose, and
tempest, too—and all that, simultaneously. the
manifold god revealed to the man that its
earthly name was fire, and that in that circular 
temple (and others like it) men had made
sacrifices and worshiped it, and that it would
magically bring to life the phantasm the man
had dreamed—so fully bring him to life that
every creature, save fire itself and the man who
dreamed him, would take him for a man of flesh
and blood. fire ordered the dreamer to send the
youth, once instructed in the rites, to that other
ruined temple whose pyramids still stood
downriver, so that a voice might glorify the god
in that deserted place. in the dreaming man's
dream, the dreamed man awoke.
the sorcerer carried out fire's instructions.
he consecrated a period of time (which in the
end encompassed two full years) to revealing to
the youth the arcana of the universe and the
secrets of the cult of fire. deep inside, it grieved
the man to separate himself from his creation.
under the pretext of pedagogical necessity, he
drew out the hours of sleep more every day. he
also redid the right shoulder (which was
perhaps defective). from time to time, he was
disturbed by a sense that all this had happened
before-----his days were, in general, happy; 
when he closed his eyes, he would think now i
will be with my son. or, less frequently, the
son i have engendered is waiting for me, and
he will not exist if i do not go to him.
gradually, the man accustomed the youth to
reality. once he ordered him to set a flag on a
distant mountaintop. the next day, the flag
crackled on the summit. he attempted other,
similar experiments—each more daring than
the last. he saw with some bitterness that his
son was ready— perhaps even impatient—to be
born. that night he kissed him for the first
time, then sent him off, through many leagues
of impenetrable jungle, many leagues of swamp,
to that other temple whose ruins bleached in
the sun downstream. but first (so that the son
would never know that he was a phantasm, so
that he would believe himself to be a man like
other men) the man infused in him a total lack
of memory of his years of education.
the man's victory, and his peace, were dulled
by the wearisome sameness of his days. in the
twilight hours of dusk and dawn, he would
prostrate himself before the stone figure,
imagining perhaps that his unreal son
performed identical rituals in other circular
ruins, downstream. at night he did not dream,
or dreamed the dreams that all men dream. his
perceptions of the universe's sounds and shapes
were somewhat pale: the absent son was
nourished by those diminutions of his soul. his
life's goal had been accomplished; the man
lived on now in a sort of ecstasy. after a period
of time (which some tellers of the story choose
to compute in years, others in decades), two
rowers woke the man at midnight. he could not
see their faces, but they told him of a magical
man in a temple in the north, a man who could
walk on fire and not be burned.
the sorcerer suddenly remembered the god's
words. he remembered that of all the creatures
on the earth, fire was the only one who knew
that his son was a phantasm. that recollection,
comforting at first, soon came to torment him.
he feared that his son would meditate upon his
unnatural privilege and somehow discover that
he was a mere simulacrum. to be not a man,
but the projection of another man's dream—
what incomparable humiliation, what vertigo!
every parent feels concern for the children he
has procreated (or allowed to be procreated) in
happiness or in mere confusion; it was only
natural that the sorcerer should fear for the
future of the son he had conceived organ by
organ, feature by feature, through a thousand
and one secret nights.
the end of his meditations came suddenly,
but it had been foretold by certain signs: first
(after a long drought), a distant cloud, as light
as a bird, upon a mountaintop; then, toward the
south, the sky the pinkish color of a leopard's
gums; then the clouds of smoke that rusted the
iron of the nights; then, at last, the panicked
flight of the animals—for that which had
occurred hundreds of years ago was being
repeated now. the ruins of the sanctuary of the
god of fire were destroyed by fire. in the
birdless dawn, the sorcerer watched the
concentric holocaust close in upon the walls.
for a moment he thought of taking refuge in the
water, but then he realized that death would be
a crown upon his age and absolve him from his 
labors. he walked into the tatters of flame, but
they did not bite his flesh—they caressed him,
bathed him without heat and without
combustion. with relief, with humiliation, with
terror, he realized that he, too, was but
appearance, that another man was dreaming
him.
the lottery in babylon
like all the men of babylon, i have been
proconsul; like all, i have been a slave. i have
known omnipotence, ignominy, imprisonment.
look here— my right hand has no index finger.
look here—through this gash in my cape you
can see on my stomach a crimson tattoo—it is
the second letter, beth.
on nights when the moon is full, this symbol
gives me power over men with the mark of
gimel, but it subjects me to those with the
aleph, who on nights when there is no moon
owe obedience to those marked with the gimel. 
in the half-light of dawn, in a cellar, standing
before a black altar, i have slit the throats of
sacred bulls. once, for an entire lunar year, i
was declared invisible—i would cry out and no
one would heed my call, i would steal bread and
not be beheaded. i have known that thing the
greeks knew not—uncertainty. in a chamber of
brass, as i faced the strangler's silent scarf,
hope did not abandon me; in the river of
delights, panic has not failed me. heraclides
ponticus reports, admiringly, that pythagoras
recalled having been pyrrhus, and before that,
euphorbus, and before that, some other mortal;
in order to recall similar vicissitudes, i have no
need of death, nor even of imposture.
i owe that almost monstrous variety to an
institution—the lottery— which is unknown in
other nations, or at work in them imperfectly or
secretly. i have not delved into this institution's
history. i know that sages cannot agree. about
its mighty purposes i know as much as a man
untutored in astrology might know about the
moon. mine is a dizzying country in which the
lottery is a major element of reality; until this 
day, i have thought as little about it as about the
conduct of the indecipherable gods or of my
heart.
now, far from babylon and its beloved
customs, i think with some bewilderment about
the lottery, and about the blasphemous
conjectures that shrouded men whisper in the
half-light of dawn or evening.
my father would tell how once, long ago—
centuries? years?—the lottery in babylon was a
game played by commoners. he would tell
(though whether this is true or not, i cannot
say) how barbers would take a man's copper
coins and give back rectangles made of bone or
parchment and adorned with symbols.
then, in broad daylight, a drawing would be
held; those smiled upon by fate would, with no
further corroboration by chance, win coins
minted of silver. the procedure, as you can see,
was rudimentary.
naturally, those so-called "lotteries" were a
failure. they had no moral force whatsoever;
they appealed not to all a man's faculties, but
only to his hopefulness. public indifference 
soon meant that the merchants who had
founded these venal lotteries began to lose
money. someone tried something new:
including among the list of lucky numbers a few
unlucky draws. this innovation meant that
those who bought those numbered rectangles
now had a twofold chance: they might win a
sum of money or they might be required to pay
a fine—sometimes a considerable one. as one
might expect, that small risk (for every thirty
"good" numbers there was one ill-omened one)
piqued the public's interest. babylonians
flocked to buy tickets. the man who bought
none was considered a pusillanimous wretch, a
man with no spirit of adventure. in time, this
justified contempt found a second target: not
just the man who didn't play, but also the man
who lost and paid the fine. the company (as it
was now beginning to be known) had to protect
the interest of the winners, who could not be
paid their prizes unless the pot contained
almost the entire amount of the fines. a lawsuit
was filed against the losers: the judge sentenced
them to pay the original fine, plus court costs, 
or spend a number of days in jail. in order to
thwart the company, they all chose jail. from
that gauntlet thrown down by a few men sprang
the company's omnipotence—its ecclesiastical,
metaphysical force.
some time after this, the announcements of
the numbers drawn began to leave out the lists
of fines and simply print the days of prison
assigned to each losing number. that
shorthand, as it were, which went virtually
unnoticed at the time, was of utmost
importance: it was the first appearance of nonpecuniary
elements in the lottery. and it met
with great success—indeed, the company was
forced by its players to increase the number of
unlucky draws.
as everyone knows, the people of babylon
are great admirers of logic, and even of
symmetry. it was inconsistent that lucky
numbers should payoff in round silver coins
while unlucky ones were measured in days and
nights of jail. certain moralists argued that the
possession of coins did not always bring about
happiness, and that other forms of happiness
were perhaps more direct.
the lower-caste neighborhoods of the city
voiced a different complaint. the members of
the priestly class gambled heavily, and so
enjoyed all the vicissitudes of terror and hope;
the poor (with understandable, or inevitable,
envy) saw themselves denied access to that
famously delightful, even sensual, wheel. the
fair and reasonable desire that all men and
women, rich and poor, be able to take part
equally in the lottery inspired indignant
demonstrations—the memory of which, time
has failed to dim. some stubborn souls could
not (or pretended they could not) understand
that this was a novu sordo sedorum, a
necessary stage of history.... a slave stole a
crimson ticket; the drawing determined that
that ticket entitled the bearer to have his tongue
burned out. the code of law provided the same
sentence for stealing a lottery ticket. some
babylonians argued that the slave deserved the
burning iron for being a thief; others, more
magnanimous, that the executioner should
employ the iron because thus fate had
decreed.... there were disturbances, there were
regrettable instances of bloodshed, but the
masses of babylon at last, over the opposition of
the well-to-do, imposed their will; they saw
their generous objectives fully achieved. first,
the company was forced to assume all public
power. (the unification was necessary because
of the vastness and complexity of the new
operations.) second, the lottery was made
secret, free of charge, and open to all. the
mercenary sale of lots was abolished; once
initiated into the mysteries of baal, every free
man automatically took part in the sacred
drawings, which were held in the labyrinths of
the god every sixty nights and determined each
man's destiny until the next drawing. the
consequences were incalculable. a lucky draw
might bring about a man's elevation to the
council of the magi or the imprisonment of his
enemy (secret, or known by all to be so), or
might allow him to find, in the peaceful
dimness of his room, the woman who would
begin to disturb him, or whom he had never
hoped to see again; an unlucky draw:
mutilation, dishonor of many kinds, death
itself. sometimes a single event—the murder of
c in a tavern, b's mysterious apotheosis—would
be the inspired outcome of thirty or forty
drawings. combining bets was difficult, but we
must recall that the individuals of the company
were (and still are) all-powerful, and clever. in
many cases, the knowledge that certain happy
turns were the simple result of chance would
have lessened the force of those outcomes; to
forestall that problem, agents of the company
employed suggestion, or even magic. the paths
they followed, the intrigues they wove, were
invariably secret. to penetrate the innermost
hopes and innermost fears of every man, they
called upon astrologers and spies. there were
certain stone lions, a sacred latrine called
qaphqa, some cracks in a dusty aqueduct—
these places, it was generally believed, gave
access to the company, and well- or ill-wishing
persons would deposit confidential reports in
them. an alphabetical file held those dossiers of
varying veracity.
incredibly, there was talk of favoritism, of
corruption. with its customary discretion, the
company did not reply directly; instead, it
scrawled its brief argument in the rubble of a
mask factory. this apologia is now numbered
among the sacred scriptures. it pointed out,
doctrinally, that the lottery is an interpolation
of chance into the order of the universe, and
observed that to accept errors is to strengthen
chance, not contravene it. it also noted that
those lions, that sacred squatting-place, though
not disavowed by the company (which reserved
the right to consult them), functioned with no
official guarantee.
this statement quieted the public's concerns.
but it also produced other effects perhaps
unforeseen by its author. it profoundly altered
both the spirit and the operations of the
company. i have but little time remaining; we
are told that the ship is about to sail—but i will
try to explain.
however unlikely it may seem, no one, until
that time, had attempted to produce a general
theory of gaming. babylonians are not a
speculative people; they obey the dictates of
chance, surrender their lives, their hopes, their
nameless terror to it, but it never occurs to
them to delve into its labyrinthine laws or the
revolving spheres that manifest its workings.
nonetheless, the semiofficial statement that i
mentioned inspired numerous debates of a legal
and mathematical nature. from one of them,
there emerged the following conjecture: if the
lottery is an intensification of chance, a
periodic infusion of chaos into the cosmos, then
is it not appropriate that chance intervene in
every aspect of the drawing, not just one? is it
not ludicrous that chance should dictate a
person's death while the circumstances of that
death—whether private or public, whether
drawn out for an hour or a century—should not
be subject to chance? those perfectly
reasonable objections finally prompted
sweeping reform; the complexities of the new
system (complicated further by its having been
in practice for centuries) are understood by only
a handful of specialists, though i will attempt to
summarize them, even if only symbolically.
let us imagine a first drawing, which
condemns a man to death. in pursuance of that
decree, another drawing is held; out of that
second drawing come, say, nine possible
executors. of those nine, four might initiate a
third drawing to determine the name of the
executioner, two might replace the unlucky
draw with a lucky one (the discovery of a
treasure, say), another might decide that the
death should be exacerbated (death with
dishonor, that is, or with the refinement of
torture), others might simply refuse to carry out
the sentence----that is the scheme of the
lottery, put symbolically. in reality, the
number of drawings is infinite. no decision is
final; all branch into others. the ignorant
assume that infinite drawings require infinite
time; actually, all that is required is that time be
infinitely sub-divisible, as in the famous parable
of the race with the tortoise. that infinitude
coincides remarkably well with the sinuous
numbers of chance and with the heavenly
archetype of the lottery beloved of platonists....
some distorted echo of our custom seems to
have reached the tiber: in his life of antoninus 
heliogabalus, aelius lampridius tells us that
the emperor wrote out on seashells the fate that
he intended for his guests at dinner—some
would receive ten pounds of gold; others, ten
houseflies, ten dormice, ten bears. it is fair to
recall that heliogabalus was raised in asia
minor, among the priests of his eponymous
god.
there are also impersonal drawings, whose
purpose is unclear. one drawing decrees that a
sapphire from taprobana be thrown into the
waters of the euphrates; another, that a bird be
released from the top of a certain tower;
another, that every hundred years a grain of
sand be added to (or taken from) the countless
grains of sand on a certain beach. sometimes,
the consequences are terrible.
under the company's beneficent influence,
our customs are now steeped in chance. the
purchaser of a dozen amphorae of damascene
wine will not be surprised if one contains a
talisman, or a viper; the scribe who writes out a
contract never fails to include some error; i
myself, in this hurried statement, have
misrepresented some splendor, some atrocity—
perhaps, too, some mysterious monotony....
our historians, the most perspicacious on the
planet, have invented a method for correcting
chance; it is well known that the outcomes of
this method are (in general) trust-worthy—
although, of course, they are never divulged
without a measure of deception. besides, there
is nothing so tainted with fiction as the history
of the company....a paleographie document,
unearthed at a certain temple, may come from
yesterday's drawing or from a drawing that took
place centuries ago. no book is published
without some discrepancy between each of the
edition's copies. scribes take a secret oath to
omit, interpolate, alter. indirect falsehood is
also practiced.
the company, with godlike modesty, shuns
all publicity. its agents, of course, are secret; the
orders it constantly (perhaps continually)
imparts are no different from those spread
wholesale by impostors.
besides—who will boast of being a mere
impostor? the drunken man who blurts out an 
absurd command, the sleeping man who
suddenly awakes and turns and chokes to death
the woman sleeping at his side—are they not,
perhaps, implementing one of the company's
secret decisions? that silent functioning, like
god's, inspires all manner of conjectures. one
scurrilously suggests that the company ceased
to exist hundreds of years ago, and that the
sacred disorder of our lives is purely hereditary,
traditional; another believes that the company
is eternal, and teaches that it shall endure until
the last night, when the last god shall annihilate
the earth. yet another declares that the
company is omnipotent, but affects only small
things: the cry of a bird, the shades of rust and
dust, the half dreams that come at dawn.
another, whispered by masked heresiarchs,
says that the company has never existed, and
never will. another, no less despicable, argues
that it makes no difference whether one affirms
or denies the reality of the shadowy
corporation, because babylon is nothing but an
infinite game of chance. 
a survey of the works of herbert quain
herbert quain died recently in roscommon.
i see with no great surprise that the times
literary supplement devoted to him a scant
half column of necrological pieties in which
there is not a single laudatory epithet that is not
set straight (or firmly reprimanded) by an
adverb. the spectator, in its corresponding
number, is less concise, no doubt, and perhaps
somewhat more cordial, but it compares
quain's first book, the god of the labyrinth,
with one by mrs. agatha christie, and others to
works by gertrude stein. these are
comparisons that no one would have thought to
be inevitable, and that would have given no
pleasure to the deceased. not that quain ever
considered himself "a man of genius" —even on
those peripatetic nights of literary conversation 
when the man who by that time had fagged
many a printing press invariably played at being
m. teste or dr. samuel johnson.... indeed, he
saw with absolute clarity the experimental
nature of his works, which might be admirable
for their innovativeness and a certain laconic
integrity, but hardly for their strength of
passion. "i am like cowley's odes," he said in a
letter to me from longford on march 6, 1939. "i
belong not to art but to the history of art." (in
his view, there was no lower discipline than
history.)
i have quoted quain's modest opinion of
himself; naturally, that modesty did not define
the boundaries of his thinking. flaubert and
henry james have managed to persuade us that
works of art are few and far between, and
maddeningly difficult to compose, but the
sixteenth century (we should recall the voyage
to parnassus, we should recall the career of
shakespeare) did not share that disconsolate
opinion. nor did herbert quain. he believed
that "great literature" is the commonest thing in
the world, and that there was hardly a
conversation in the street that did not attain
those "heights." he also believed that the
aesthetic act must contain some element of
surprise, shock, astonishment—and that being
astonished by rote is difficult, so he deplored
with smiling sincerity "the servile, stubborn
preservation of past and bygone books." ... i do
not know whether that vague theory of his is
justifiable or not; i do know that his books
strive too greatly to astonish.
i deeply regret having lent to a certain lady,
irrecoverably, the first book that quain
published. i have said that it was a detective
story— the god of the labyrinth; what a
brilliant idea the publisher had, bringing it out
in late november, 1933. in early december, the
pleasant yet arduous convolutions of the
siamese twin mystery* gave london and new
york a good deal of "gumshoe" work to do—in
my view, the failure of our friend's work can be
laid to that ruinous coincidence. (though there
is also the question—i wish to be totally
honest—of its somewhat careless plotting and
the hollow, frigid stiltedness of certain
descriptions of the sea.) seven years later, i
cannot for the life of me recall the details of the
plot, but this is the general scheme of it,
impoverished (or purified) by my forgetfulness:
there is an
incomprehensible murder in the early pages
of the book, a slow discussion in the middle,
and a solution of the crime toward the end.
once the mystery has been cleared up, there is a
long retrospective paragraph that contains the
following sentence: everyone believed that the
chess players had meta-accidentally. that
phrase allows one to infer that the solution is in
fact in error, and so, uneasy, the reader looks
back over the pertinent chapters and discovers
another solution, which is the correct one. the
reader of this remarkable book, then, is more
perspicacious than the detective.
an even more heterodox work is the
"regressive, ramifying fiction" april march,
whose third (and single) section is dated 1936.
no one, in assaying this novel, can fail to
discover that it is a kind of game; it is
legitimate, i should think, to recall that the
author himself never saw it in any other light. "i
have reclaimed for this novel," i once heard him
say, "the essential features of every game: the
symmetry, the arbitrary laws, the tedium." even
the name is a feeble pun: it is not someone's
name, does not mean "a march [taken] in
april," but literally april-march. someone once
noted that there is an echo of the doctrines of
dunne in the pages of this book; quain's
foreword prefers instead to allude to that
backward-running world posited by bradley, in
which death precedes birth, the scar precedes 
the wound, and the wound precedes the blow
(appearance and reality, 1897, p. 215).1
[
1 so much for herbert quain's erudition, so
much for page 215 of a book published in 1897.
the interlocutor of plato's politicus, the
unnamed "eleatic stranger," had described,
over two thousand years earlier, a similar
regression, that of the children of terra, the
autochthons, who, under the influence of a
reverse rotation of the cosmos, grow from old
age to maturity, from maturity to childhood,
from childhood to extinction and nothingness.
theopompus, too, in his philippics, speaks of
certain northern fruits which produce in the
person who eats them the same retrograde
growth — even more interesting than these
images is imagining an inversion of time
itself—a condition in which we would
remember the future and know nothing, or
perhaps have only the barest inkling, of the
past. cf. inferno, canto x, ii. 97-105» in which
the prophetic vision is compared to
farsightedness.]
but it is not the worlds proposed by april 
march that are regressive, it is the way the
stories are told—regressively and ramifying, as i
have said. the book is composed of thirteen
chapters. the first reports an ambiguous
conversation between several unknown persons
on a railway station platform. the second tells
of the events of the evening that precedes the
first. the third, likewise retrograde, tells of the
events of another, different, possible evening
before the first; the fourth chapter relates the
events of yet a third different possible evening.
each of these (mutually exclusive) "eveningsbefore"
ramifies into three further "eveningsbefore,"
all quite different. the work in its
entirety consists, then, of nine novels; each
novel, of three long chapters. (the first chapter
is common to all, of course.) of those novels,
one is symbolic; another, supernatural;
another, a detective novel; another,
psychological; another, a communist novel;
another, anti-communist; and so on. perhaps
the following symbolic representation will help
the reader understand the novel's structure:
with regard to this structure, it may be
apposite to say once again what schopenhauer
said about kant's twelve categories: "he
sacrifices everything to his rage for symmetry."
predictably, one and another of the nine tales is
unworthy of quain; the best is not the one that
quain first conceived, x ; it is, rather, x, a tale
of fantasy. others are marred by pallid jokes
and instances of pointless pseudoexactitude.those
who read the tales in
chronological order (e.g., x , y » z) will miss the
strange book's peculiar flavor. two stories— x
and x —have no particular individual value; it 
is their juxtaposition that makes them
effective.... i am not certain whether i should
remind the reader that after april march was
published, quain had second thoughts about
the triune order of the book and predicted that
the mortals who imitated it would opt instead
for a binary scheme—while the gods and
demiurges had chosen an infinite one: infinite
stories, infinitely branching.
quite unlike april march, yet similarly
retrospective, is the heroic two-act comedy the
secret mirror.
in the works we have looked at so far, a
formal complexity hobbles the author's
imagination; in the secret mirror, that
imagination is given freer rein. the play's first
(and longer) act takes place in the country
home of general thrale, c.i.e., near melton
mowbray. the unseen center around which the
plot revolves is miss ulrica thrale, the general's
elder daughter. snatches of dialog give us
glimpses of this young woman, a haughty
amazon-like creature; we are led to suspect that
she seldom journeys to the realms of literature. 
the newspapers have announced her
engagement to the duke of rutland; the
newspapers then report that the engagement is
off. miss thrale is adored by a playwright, one
wilfred quarles; once or twice in the past, she
has bestowed a distracted kiss upon this young
man. the characters possess vast fortunes and
ancient blood-lines; their affections are noble
though vehement; the dialog seems to swing
between the extremes of a hollow
grandiloquence worthy of bulwer-lytton and
the epigrams of wilde or philip guedalla. there
is a nightingale and a night; there is a secret
duel on the terrace. (though almost entirely
imperceptible, there are occasional curious
contradictions, and there are sordid details.)
the characters of the first act reappear in the
second— under different names. the
"playwright" wilfred quarles is a traveling
salesman from liverpool; his real name is john
william quigley. miss thrale does exist, though
quigley has never seen her; he morbidly clips
pictures of her out of the tatler or the sketch.
quigley is the author of the first act; the
implausible or improbable "country house" is
the jewish-irish rooming house he lives in,
transformed and magnified by his
imagination…
the plot of the two acts is parallel, though in
the second everything is slightly menacing—
everything is put off, or frustrated. when the
secret mirror first opened, critics spoke the
names "freud" and "julian green." in my view,
the mention of the first of those is entirely
unjustified. report had it that the secret
mirror was a freudian comedy; that favorable
(though fallacious) reading decided the play's
success.
unfortunately, quain was over forty; he had
grown used to failure, and could not go gently
into that change of state. he resolved to have
his revenge. in late 1939 he published
statements, perhaps the most original of his
works—certainly the least praised and most
secret of them. quain would often argue that
readers were an extinct species. "there is no
european man or woman," he would sputter,
"that's not a writer, potentially or in fact." he 
would also declare that of the many kinds of
pleasure literature can minister, the highest is
the pleasure of the imagination. since not
everyone is capable of experiencing that
pleasure, many will have to content themselves
with simulacra. for those "writers manques"
whose name is legion, quain wrote the eight
stories of statements. each of them prefigures,
or promises, a good plot, which is then
intentionally frustrated by the author. one of
the stories (not the best) hints at two plots; the
reader, blinded by vanity, believes that he
himself has come up with them. from the third
story, titled "the rose of yesterday," i was
ingenuous enough to extract "the circular
ruins," which is one of the stories in my book
the garden of forking paths. 1941
the library of babel
by this art you may contemplate the variation of the
23 letters....
anatomy of melancholy, pt. 2, sec. ii, mem. iv 
the universe (which others call the library)
is composed of an indefinite, perhaps infinite
number of hexagonal galleries. in the center of
each gallery is a ventilation shaft, bounded by a
low railing. from any hexagon one can see the
floors above and below—one after another,
endlessly. the arrangement of the galleries is
always the same: twenty bookshelves, five to
each side, line four of the hexagon's six sides;
the height of the bookshelves, floor to ceiling, is
hardly greater than the height of a normal
librarian.
one of the hexagon's free sides opens onto a
narrow sort of vestibule, which in turn opens
onto another gallery, identical to the first—
identical in fact to all. to the left and right of
the vestibule are two tiny compartments. one is
for sleeping, upright; the other, for satisfying
one's physical necessities. through this space,
too, there passes a spiral staircase, which winds
upward and downward into the remotest
distance. in the vestibule there is a mirror,
which faithfully duplicates appearances. men
often infer from this mirror that the library is
not infinite—if it were, what need would there
be for that illusory replication? i prefer to
dream that burnished surfaces are a figuration
and promise of the infinite.... light is provided
by certain spherical fruits that bear the name
"bulbs." there are two of these bulbs in each
hexagon, set crosswise. the light they give is
insufficient, and unceasing.
like all the men of the library, in my
younger days i traveled; i have journeyed in
quest of a book, perhaps the catalog of catalogs.
now that my eyes can hardly make out what i
myself have written, i am preparing to die, a
few leagues from the hexagon where i was born.
when i am dead, compassionate hands will
throw me over the railing; my tomb will be the
unfathomable air, my body will sink for ages,
and will decay and dissolve in the wind
engendered by my fall, which shall be infinite. i
declare that the library is endless. idealists
argue that the hexagonal rooms are the
necessary shape of absolute space, or at least of
our perception of space. they argue that a
triangular or pentagonal chamber is
inconceivable.
(mystics claim that their ecstasies reveal to
them a circular chamber containing an
enormous circular book with a continuous spine
that goes completely around the walls. but their
testimony is suspect, their words obscure. that
cyclical book is god.) let it suffice for the
moment that i repeat the classic dictum: the
library is a sphere whose exact center is any
hexagon and whose circumference is
unattainable.
each wall of each hexagon is furnished with
five bookshelves; each bookshelf holds thirtytwo
books identical in format; each book
contains four hundred ten pages; each page,
forty lines; each line, approximately eighty
black letters. there are also letters on the front
cover of each book; those letters neither
indicate nor prefigure what the pages inside will
say. i am aware that that lack of
correspondence once struck men as mysterious.
before summarizing the solution of the mystery
(whose discovery, in spite of its tragic
consequences, is perhaps the most important
event in all history), i wish to recall a few
axioms.
first: the library has existed ab aeternitate.
that truth, whose immediate corollary is the
future eternity of the world, no rational mind
can doubt. man, the imperfect librarian, may be
the work of chance or of malevolent demiurges;
the universe, with its elegant appointments—its
bookshelves, its enigmatic books, its
indefatigable staircases for the traveler, and its
water closets for the seated librarian—can only
be the handiwork of a god. in order to grasp the
distance that separates the human and the
divine, one has only to compare these crude
trembling symbols which my fallible hand
scrawls on the cover of a book with the organic
letters inside—neat, delicate, deep black, and
inimitably symmetrical.
second: there are twenty-five orthographic
symbols.
1 [
1
'the original manuscript has neither
numbers nor capital letters; punctuation is
limited to the comma and the period. those two
marks, the space, and the twenty-two letters of 
the alphabet are the twenty-five sufficient
symbols that our unknown author is referring
to. --- ed. note.]
that discovery enabled mankind, three
hundred years ago, to formulate a general
theory of the library and thereby satisfactorily
solve the riddle that no conjecture had been
able to divine—the formless and chaotic nature
of virtually all books. one book, which my
father once saw in a hexagon in circuit 15-94,
consisted of the letters m c v perversely
repeated from the first line to the last. another
(much consulted in this zone) is a mere
labyrinth of letters whose penultimate page
contains the phrase o time thy pyramids. this
much is known: for every rational line or
forthright statement there are leagues of
senseless cacophony, verbal nonsense, and
incoherency. (i know of one semi-barbarous
zone whose librarians repudiate the "vain and
superstitious habit" of trying to find sense in
books, equating such a quest with attempting to
find meaning in dreams or in the chaotic lines
of the palm of one's hand.... they will
acknowledge that the inventors of writing
imitated the twenty-five natural symbols, but
contend that that adoption was fortuitous,
coincidental, and that books in themselves have
no meaning. that argument, as we shall see, is
not entirely fallacious.)
for many years it was believed that those
impenetrable books were in ancient or fardistant
languages. it is true that the most
ancient peoples, the first librarians, employed a
language quite different from the one we speak
today; it is true that a few miles to the right, our
language devolves into dialect and that ninety
floors above, it becomes incomprehensible. all
of that, i repeat, is true—but four hundred ten
pages of unvarying m c v's cannot belong to
any language, however dialectal or primitive it
may be. some have suggested that each letter
influences the next, and that the value of m c v
on page 71, line 3, is not the value of the same
series on another line of another page, but that
vague thesis has not met with any great
acceptance. others have mentioned the
possibility of codes; that conjecture has been
universally accepted, though not in the sense in
which its originators formulated it.
some five hundred years ago, the chief of one
of the upper hexagons2 [
2 in earlier times, there
was one man for every three hexagons. suicide
and diseases of the lung have played havoc with
that proportion. an unspeakably melancholy
memory: i have sometimes traveled for nights
on end, down corridors and polished staircases,
without coming across a single librarian.] came
across a book as jumbled as all the others, but
containing almost two pages of homogeneous
lines.
he showed his find to a traveling decipherer,
who told him that the lines were written in
portuguese; others said it was yiddish. within
the century experts had determined what the
language actually was: a samoyed-lithuanian
dialect of guaraní, with inflections from
classical arabic. the content was also
determined: the rudiments of combinatory
analysis, illustrated with examples of endlessly
repeating variations. those examples allowed a
librarian of genius to discover the fundamental 
law of the library.
this philosopher observed that all books,
however different from one another they might
be, consist of identical elements: the space, the
period, the comma, and the twenty-two letters
of the alphabet. he also posited a fact which all
travelers have since confirmed: in all the
library, there are no two identical books.
from those incontrovertible premises, the
librarian deduced that the library is "total"—
perfect, complete, and whole—and that its
bookshelves contain all possible combinations
of the twenty-two orthographic symbols (a
number which, though unimaginably vast, is
not infinite)—that is, all that is able to be
expressed, in every language. all —the detailed
history of the future, the autobiographies of the
archangels, the faithful catalog of the library,
thousands and thousands of false catalogs, the
proof of the falsity of those false catalogs, a
proof of the falsity of the true catalog, the
gnostic gospel of basilides, the commentary
upon that gospel, the commentary on the
commentary on that gospel, the true story of
your death, the translation of every book into
every language, the interpolations of every book
into all books, the treatise bede could have
written (but did not) on the mythology of the
saxon people, the lost books of tacitus.
when it was announced that the library
contained all books, the first reaction was
unbounded joy. all men felt themselves the
possessors of an intact and secret treasure.
there was no personal problem, no world
problem, whose eloquent solution did not
exist—somewhere in some hexagon. the
universe was justified; the universe suddenly
became congruent with the unlimited width and
breadth of humankind's hope. at that period
there was much talk of the vindications—books
of apologià and prophecies that would
vindicate for all time the actions of every person
in the universe and that held wondrous arcana
for men's futures. thousands of greedy
individuals abandoned their sweet native
hexagons and rushed downstairs, up-stairs,
spurred by the vain desire to find their
vindication. these pilgrims squabbled in the
narrow corridors, muttered dark imprecations,
strangled one another on the divine staircases,
threw deceiving volumes down ventilation
shafts, were themselves hurled to their deaths
by men of distant regions. others went
insane.... the vindications do exist (i have seen
two of them, which refer to persons in the
future, persons perhaps not imaginary), but
those who went in quest of them failed to recall
that the chance of a man's finding his own
vindication, or some perfidious version of his
own, can be calculated to be zero.
at that same period there was also hope that
the fundamental mysteries of mankind—the
origin of the library and of time—might be
revealed. in all likelihood those profound
mysteries can indeed be explained in words; if
the language of the philosophers is not
sufficient, then the multiform library must
surely have produced the extraordinary
language that is required, together with the
words and grammar of that language. for four
centuries, men have been scouring the
hexagons.... there are official searchers, the
"inquisitors." i have seen them about their
tasks: they arrive exhausted at some hexagon,
they talk about a staircase that nearly killed
them—rungs were missing—they speak with the
librarian about galleries and staircases, and,
once in a while, they take up the nearest book
and leaf through it, searching for disgraceful or
dishonorable words. clearly, no one expects to
discover anything.
that unbridled hopefulness was succeeded,
naturally enough, by a similarly
disproportionate depression.
the certainty that some bookshelf in some
hexagon contained precious books, yet that
those precious books were forever out of reach,
was almost unbearable. one blasphemous sect
proposed that the searches be discontinued and
that all men shuffle letters and symbols until
those canonical books, through some
improbable stroke of chance, had been
constructed. the authorities were forced to
issue strict orders. the sect disappeared, but in
my childhood i have seen old men who for long
periods would hide in the latrines with metal
disks and a forbidden dice cup, feebly
mimicking the divine disorder.
others, going about it in the opposite way,
thought the first thing to do was eliminate all
worthless books.
they would invade the hexagons, show
credentials that were not always false, leaf
disgustedly through a volume, and condemn
entire walls of books. it is to their hygienic,
ascetic rage that we lay the senseless loss of
millions of volumes. their name is execrated
today, but those who grieve over the "treasures"
destroyed in that frenzy overlook two widely
acknowledged facts: one, that the library is so
huge that any reduction by human hands must
be infinitesimal. and two, that each book is
unique and irreplaceable, but (since the library
is total) there are always several hundred
thousand imperfect facsimiles—books that
differ by no more than a single letter, or a
comma. despite general opinion, i daresay that
the consequences of the depredations
committed by the purifiers have been
exaggerated by the horror those same fanatics
inspired. they were spurred on by the holy zeal
to reach—someday, through unrelenting
effort—the books of the crimson hexagon—
books smaller than natural books, books
omnipotent, illustrated, and magical.
we also have knowledge of another
superstition from that period: belief in what
was termed the book man. on some shelf in
some hexagon, it was argued, there must exist a
book that is the cipher and perfect compendium
of all other books, and some librarian must
have examined that book; this librarian is
analogous to a god. in the language of this zone
there are still vestiges of the sect that worshiped
that distant librarian. many have gone in search
of him. for a hundred years, men beat every
possible path— and every path in vain. how
was one to locate the idolized secret hexagon
that sheltered him? someone proposed
searching by regression: to locate book a, first
consult book b, which tells where book a can be
found; to locate book b, first consult book c,
and so on, to infinity....
it is in ventures such as these that i have
squandered and spent my years. i cannot think
it unlikely that there is such a total book3
3 i repeat: in order for a book to exist, it is
sufficient that it be possible. only the
impossible is excluded. for example, no book is
also a staircase, though there are no doubt
books that discuss and deny and prove that
possibility, and others whose structure
corresponds to that of a staircase on some shelf
in the universe. i pray to the unknown gods that
some man—even a single man, tens of centuries
ago—has perused and read that book. if the
honor and wisdom and joy of such a reading are
not to be my own, then let them be for others.
let heaven exist, though my own place be in
hell. let me be tortured and battered and
annihilated, but let there be one instant, one
creature, wherein thy enormous library may
find its justification.
infidels claim that the rule in the library is
not "sense," but "nonsense," and that
"rationality" (even humble, pure coherence) is
an almost miraculous exception. they speak, i
know, of "the feverish library, whose random
volumes constantly threaten to transmogrify
into others, so that they affirm all things, deny
all things, and confound and confuse all things,
like some mad and hallucinating deity." those
words, which not only proclaim disorder but
exemplify it as well, prove, as all can see, the
infidels' deplorable taste and desperate
ignorance. for while the library contains all
verbal structures, all the variations allowed by
the twenty-five orthographic symbols, it
includes not a single absolute piece of
nonsense. it would be pointless to observe that
the finest volume of all the many hexagons that
i myself administer is titled combed thunder,
while another is titled the plaster cramp, and
another, axaxaxasmio. those phrases, at first
apparently incoherent, are undoubtedly
susceptible to cryptographic or allegorical
"reading"; that reading, that justification of the
words' order and existence, is itself verbal and,
ex hypothesis, already contained somewhere in
the library. there is no combination of
characters one can make— dhcmrlchtdj, for
example—that the divine library has not
foreseen and that in one or more of its secret
tongues does not hide a terrible significance.
there is no syllable one can speak that is not
filled with tenderness and terror, that is not, in
one of those languages, the mighty name of a
god. to speak is to commit tautologies. this
pointless, verbose epistle already exists in one
of the thirty volumes of the five bookshelves in
one of the countless hexagons—as does its
refutation. (a number n of the possible
languages employ the same vocabulary; in some
of them, the symbol "library" possesses the
correct definition "everlasting, ubiquitous
system of hexagonal galleries," while a library—
the thing—is a loaf of bread or a pyramid or
something else, and the six words that define it
themselves have other definitions. you who
read me—are you certain you understand my
language?) methodical composition distracts
me from the present condition of humanity.
the certainty that everything has already been
written annuls us, or renders us phantasmal. i
know districts in which the young people
prostrate themselves before books and like
savages kiss their pages, though they cannot
read a letter. epidemics, heretical discords,
pilgrimages that inevitably degenerate into
brigandage have decimated the population. i
believe i mentioned the suicides, which are
more and more frequent every year. i am
perhaps misled by old age and fear, but i
suspect that the human species— the only
species—teeters at the verge of extinction, yet
that the library— enlightened, solitary, infinite,
perfectly unmoving, armed with precious
volumes, pointless, incorruptible, and secret—
will endure.
i have just written the word "infinite." i have
not included that adjective out of mere
rhetorical habit; i hereby state that it is not
illogical to think that the world is infinite. those
who believe it to have limits hypothesize that in
some remote place or places the corridors and
staircases and hexagons may, inconceivably,
end—which is absurd. and yet those who
picture the world as unlimited forget that the
number of possible books is not. i will be bold
enough to suggest this solution to the ancient
problem: the library is unlimited but periodic.
if an eternal traveler should journey in any
direction, he would find after untold centuries
that the same volumes are repeated in the same
disorder—which, repeated, becomes order: the
order. my solitude is cheered by that elegant
hope.4
 [4 letizia alvarez de toledo has observed
that the vast library is pointless; strictly
speaking, all that is required is a single volume,
of the common size, printed in nine- or tenpoint
type, that would consist of an infinite
number of infinitely thin pages. (in the early
seventeenth century, cavalieri stated that every
solid body is the super-position of an infinite
number of planes.) using that silken vade
mécum would not be easy: each apparent page
would open into other similar pages; the
inconceivable middle page would have no
"back."]
mar del plata
the garden of forking paths
for victoria ocampo
on page 242 of the history of the world
war, liddell hart tells us that an allied
offensive against the serre-montauban line (to
be mounted by thirteen british divisions backed
by one thousand four hundred artillery pieces)
had been planned for july 24, 1916, but had to
be put off until the morning of the twentyninth.
torrential rains (notes capt. liddell
hart) were the cause of that delay—a delay that
entailed no great consequences, as it turns out.
the statement which follows—dictated, reread,
and signed by dr. yu tsun, former professor of
english in the hochschule at tsingtao— throws
unexpected light on the case. the two first
pages of the statement are missing.
... and i hung up the receiver. immediately
afterward, i recognized the voice that had
answered in german. it was that of capt.
richard madden. madden's presence in viktor
runeberg's flat meant the end of our efforts and
(though this seemed to me quite secondary, or 
should have seemed) our lives as well. it meant
that runeberg had been arrested, or murdered.1
[
1a bizarre and despicable supposition. the
prussian spy hans rabener, alias viktor
runeberg, had turned an automatic pistol on
his arresting officer, capt. richard madden.
madden, in self-defense, inflicted the wounds
on rabener that caused his subsequent death. --
- ed. note.]
before the sun set on that day, i would face
the same fate. madden was implacable—or
rather, he was obliged to be implacable. an
irishman at the orders of the english, a man
accused of a certain lack of zealousness,
perhaps even treason, how could he fail to
embrace and give thanks for this miraculous
favour—the discovery, capture, perhaps death,
of two agents of the german empire? i went
upstairs to my room; absurdly, i locked the
door, and then i threw myself, on my back, onto
my narrow iron bed.
outside the window were the usual rooftops
and the overcast six o'clock sun. i found it
incredible that this day, lacking all omens and 
premonitions, should be the day of my
implacable death. despite my deceased father,
despite my having been a child in a symmetrical
garden in hai feng—was i, now, about to die?
then i reflected that all things happen to
oneself, and happen precisely, precisely now.
century follows century, yet events occur only
in the present; countless men in the air, on the
land and sea, yet everything that truly happens,
happens to me.... the almost unbearable
memory of madden's horsey face demolished
those mental ramblings. in the midst of my
hatred and my terror (now i don't mind talking
about terror—now that i have foiled richard
madden, now that my neck hungers for the
rope), it occurred to me that that brawling and
undoubtedly happy warrior did not suspect that
i possessed the secret—the name of the exact
location of the new british artillery park on the
ancre. a bird furrowed the grey sky, and i
blindly translated it into an aeroplane, and that
aeroplane into many (in the french sky),
annihilating the artillery park with vertical
bombs. if only my throat, before a bullet
crushed it, could cry out that name so that it
might be heard in germany.... but my human
voice was so terribly inadequate.
how was i to make it reach the leader's
ear—the ear of that sick and hateful man who
knew nothing of runeberg and me save that we
were in staffordshire, and who was vainly
awaiting word from us in his arid office in
berlin, poring infinitely through the
newspapers? ...i must flee, i said aloud. i sat up
noiselessly, in needless but perfect silence, as
though madden were already just outside my
door.
something—perhaps the mere show of
proving that my resources were nonexistent—
made me go through my pockets. i found what i
knew i would find: the american watch, the
nickel-plated chain and quadrangular coin, the
key ring with the compromising and useless
keys to runeberg's flat, the notebook, a letter i
resolved to destroy at once (and never did), the
false passport, one crown, two shillings, and a
few odd pence, the red-and-blue pencil, the
handkerchief, the revolver with its single bullet. 
absurdly, i picked it up and hefted it, to give
myself courage. i vaguely reflected that a pistol
shot can be heard at a considerable distance. in
ten minutes, my plan was ripe. the telephone
book gave me the name of the only person able
to communicate the information: he lived in a
suburb of fenton, less than a half hour away by
train. i am a coward. i can say that, now that i
have carried out a plan whose dangerousness
and daring no man will deny. i know that it was
a terrible thing to do. i did not do it for
germany. what do i care for a barbaric country
that has forced me to the ignominy of spying?
furthermore, i know of a man of england—a
modest man—who in my view is no less a
genius than goethe. i spoke with him for no
more than an hour, but for one hour he was
goethe-----no—i did it because i sensed that
the leader looked down on the people of my
race—the countless ancestors whose blood
flows through my veins. i wanted to prove to
him that a yellow man could save his armies.
and i had to escape from madden. his hands,
his voice, could beat upon my door at any
moment. i silently dressed, said goodbye to
myself in the mirror, made my way downstairs,
looked up and down the quiet street, and set off.
the train station was not far from my flat, but i
thought it better to take a cab. i argued that i
ran less chance of being recognized that way;
the fact is, i felt i was visible and vulnerable—
infinitely vulnerable—in the deserted street. i
recall that i told the driver to stop a little ways
from the main entrance to the station. i got
down from the cab with willed and almost
painful slowness. i would be going to the village
of ash grove, but i bought a ticket for a station
farther down the line. the train was to leave at
eight-fifty, scant minutes away. i had to hurry;
the next train would not be until nine-thirty.
there was almost no one on the platform. i
walked through the cars; i recall a few
workmen, a woman dressed in mourning
weeds, a young man fervently reading tacit us'
annals, and a cheerful-looking wounded
soldier. the train pulled out at last. a man i
recognised ran, vainly, out to the end of the
platform; it was capt. richard madden.
shattered, trembling, i huddled on the other
end of the seat, far from the feared window.
from that shattered state i passed into a
state of almost abject cheerfulness. i told myself
that my duel had begun, and that in dodging my
adversary's thrust—even by forty minutes, even
thanks to the slightest smile from fate—the first
round had gone to me. i argued that this small
win prefigured total victory. i argued that the
win was not really even so small, since without
the precious hour that the trains had given me,
i'd be in gaol, or dead. i argued (no less
sophistically) that my cowardly cheerfulness
proved that i was a man capable of following
this adventure through to its successful end.
from that weakness i drew strength that was
never to abandon me. i foresee that mankind
will resign itself more and more fully every day
to more and more horrendous undertakings;
soon there will be nothing but warriors and
brigands. i give them this piece of advice: he
who is to perform a horrendous act should
imagine to himself that it is already done,
should impose upon himself a future as
irrevocable as the past.
that is what i did, while my eyes—the eyes of
a man already dead—registered the flow of that
day perhaps to be my last, and the spreading of
the night. the train ran sweetly, gently, through
woods of ash trees. it stopped virtually in the
middle of the countryside. no one called out the
name of the station.
"ashgrove?" i asked some boys on the
platform. "ashgrove," they said, nodding. i got
off the train.
a lamp illuminated the platform, but the
boys' faces remained within the area of shadow.
"are you going to dr. stephen albert's house?"
one queried. without waiting for an answer,
another of them said: "the house is a far way,
but you'll not get lost if you follow that road
there to the left, and turn left at every crossing."
i tossed them a coin (my last), went down some
stone steps, and started down the solitary road.
it ran ever so slightly downhill and was of
elemental dirt. branches tangled overhead, and
the low round moon seemed to walk along
beside me. 
for one instant, i feared that richard
madden had somehow seen through my
desperate plan, but i soon realized that that was
impossible. the boy's advice to turn always to
the left reminded me that that was the common
way of discovering the central lawn of a certain
type of maze. i am something of a connoisseur
of mazes: not for nothing am i the greatgrandson
of that ts'ui pen who was governor of
yunan province and who renounced all
temporal power in order to write a novel
containing more characters than the hung lu
meng and construct a labyrinth in which all
men would lose their way. ts'ui pen devoted
thirteen years to those disparate labours, but
the hand of a foreigner murdered him and his
novel made no sense and no one ever found the
labyrinth. it was under english trees that i
meditated on that lost labyrinth: i pictured it
perfect and inviolate on the secret summit of a
mountain; i pictured its outlines blurred by rice
paddies, or underwater; i pictured it as
infinite—a labyrinth not of octagonal pavillions
and paths that turn back upon themselves, but
of rivers and provinces and kingdoms-----i
imagined a labyrinth of labyrinths, amaze of
mazes, a twisting, turning, ever-widening
labyrinth that contained both past and future
and somehow implied the stars. absorbed in
those illusory imaginings, i forgot that i was a
pursued man; i felt myself, for an indefinite
while, the abstract perceiver of the world.
the vague, living countryside, the moon, the
remains of the day did their work in me; so did
the gently downward road, which forestalled all
possibility of weariness. the evening was near,
yet infinite.
the road dropped and forked as it cut
through the now-formless meadows. a keen
and vaguely syllabic song, blurred by leaves and
distance, rain, and i went on the gentle mists of
breeze. i was struck by the thought that a man
may be the enemy of other men, the enemy of
other men's other moments, yet not be the
enemy of a country—of fireflies, words, gardens,
water-courses, zephyrs. it was amidst such
thoughts that i came to a high rusty gate.
through the iron bars i made out a drive lined 
with poplars, and a gazebo of some kind.
suddenly, i realised two things—the first trivial,
the second almost incredible: the music i had
heard was coming from that gazebo, or
pavillion, and the music was chinese. that was
why unconsciously i had fully given myself over
to it. i do not recall whether there was a bell or
whether i had to clap my hands to make my
arrival known.
the sputtering of the music continued, but
from the rear of the intimate house, a lantern
was making its way toward me—a lantern crosshatched
and sometimes blotted out altogether
by the trees, a paper lantern the shape of a
drum and the colour of the moon. it was carried
by a tall man. i could not see his face because
the light blinded me. he opened the gate and
slowly spoke to me in my own language.
"i see that the compassionate hsi p'eng has
undertaken to remedy my solitude. you will no
doubt wish to see the garden?"
i recognised the name of one of our consuls,
but i could only disconcertedly repeat, "the
garden?" 
"the garden of forking paths."
something stirred in my memory, and i
spoke with incomprehensible assurance.
"the garden of my ancestor ts'ui pen."
"your ancestor? your illustrious ancestor?”
“please—come in."
the dew-drenched path meandered like the
paths of my childhood. we came to a library of
western and oriental books. i recognised,
bound in yellow silk, several handwritten
volumes of the lost encyclopedia compiled by
the third emperor of the luminous dynasty but
never printed. the disk on the gramophone
revolved near a bronze phoenix. i also recall a
vase of famillerose and another, earlier by
several hundred years, of that blue colour our
artificers copied from the potters of ancient
persia-----stephen albert, with a smile,
regarded me. he was, as i have said, quite tall,
with sharp features, grey eyes, and a grey beard.
there was something priest-like about him,
somehow, but something sailor-like as well;
later he told me he had been a missionary in
tien-tsin "before aspiring to be a sinologist." 
we sat down, i on a long low divan, he with
his back to the window and a tall circular clock.
i figured that my pursuer, richard madden,
could not possibly arrive for at least an hour.
my irrevocable decision could wait.
"an amazing life, ts'ui pen's," stephen albert
said. "governor of the province in which he had
been born, a man learned in astronomy,
astrology, and the unwearying interpretation of
canonical books, a chess player, a renowned
poet and calligraphier—he abandoned it all in
order to compose a book and a labyrinth. he
renounced the pleasures of oppression, justice,
the populous marriage bed, banquets, and even
erudition in order to sequester himself for
thirteen years in the pavillion of limpid
solitude. upon his death, his heirs found
nothing but chaotic manuscripts. the family, as
you perhaps are aware, were about to deliver
them to the fire, but his counsellor—a taoist or
buddhist monk—insisted upon publishing
them."
"to this day," i replied, "we who are
descended from ts'ui pen execrate that monk.
it was senseless to publish those manuscripts.
the book is a contradictory jumble of irresolute
drafts. i once examined it myself; in the third
chapter the hero dies, yet in the fourth he is
alive again. as for ts'ui pen's other labor, his
labyrinth ..."
"here is the labyrinth," albert said,
gesturing towards a tall lacquered writing
cabinet.
"an ivory labyrinth!" i exclaimed. "a very
small sort of labyrinth ..."
"a labyrinth of symbols," he corrected me.
"an invisible labyrinth of time. i, an english
barbarian, have somehow been chosen to unveil
the diaphanous mystery. now, more than a
hundred years after the fact, the precise details
are irrecoverable, but it is not difficult to
surmise what happened. ts'ui pen must at one
point have remarked, 'i shall retire to write a
book,' and at another point, 'i shall retire to
construct a labyrinth.' everyone pictured two
projects; it occurred to no one that book and
labyrinth were one and the same. the pavillion
of limpid solitude was erected in the centre of 
a garden that was, perhaps, most intricately laid
out; that fact might well have suggested a
physical labyrinth. ts'ui pen died; no one in all
the wide lands that had been his could find the
labyrinth. the novel's confusion—confusedness,
i mean, of course—suggested to me that it was
that labyrinth. two circumstances lent me the
final solution of the problem—one, the curious
legend that ts'ui pen had intended to construct
a labyrinth which was truly infinite, and two, a
fragment of a letter i discovered."
albert stood. his back was turned to me for
several moments; he opened a drawer in the
black-and-gold writing cabinet. he turned back
with a paper that had once been crimson but
was now pink and delicate and rectangular. it
was written in ts'ui pen's renowned
calligraphy. eagerly yet uncomprehendingly i
read the words that a man of my own lineage
had written with painstaking brushstrokes: i
leave to several futures (not to all) my garden
of forking paths. i wordlessly handed the paper
back to albert. he continued:
"before unearthing this letter, i had
wondered how a book could be infinite. the
only way i could surmise was that it be a
cyclical, or circular, volume, a volume whose
last page would be identical to the first, so that
one might go on indefinitely. i also recalled that
night at the centre of the 1001 nights, when the
queen scheherazade (through some magical
distractedness on the part of the copyist) begins
to retell, verbatim, the story of the 1001 nights,
with the risk of returning once again to the
night on which she is telling it—and so on, ad
infinitum. i also pictured to myself a platonic,
hereditary sort of work, passed down from
father to son, in which each new individual
would add a chapter or with reverent care
correct his elders' pages. these imaginings
amused and distracted me, but none of them
seemed to correspond even remotely to ts'ui
pen's contradictory chapters. as i was
floundering about in the mire of these
perplexities, i was sent from oxford the
document you have just examined. i paused, as
you may well imagine, at the sentence 'i leave to
several futures (not to all) my garden of forking 
paths.'
almost instantly, i saw it—the garden of
forking paths was the chaotic novel; the phrase
'several futures (not all)' suggested to me the
image of a forking in time, rather than in space.
a full rereading of the book confirmed my
theory. in all fictions, each time a man meets
diverse alternatives, he chooses one and
eliminates the others; in the work of the
virtually impossible-to-disentangle ts'ui pen,
the character chooses— simultaneously—all of
them. he creates, thereby, 'several futures,'
several times, which themselves proliferate and
fork. that is the explanation for the novel's
contradictions. fang, let us say, has a secret; a
stranger knocks at his door; fang decides to kill
him. naturally, there are various possible
outcomes—fang can kill the intruder, the
intruder can kill fang, they can both live, they
can both be killed, and so on. in ts'ui pen's
novel, all the outcomes in fact occur; each is the
starting point for further bifurcations. once in a
while, the paths of that labyrinth converge: for
example, you come to this house, but in one of 
the possible pasts you are my enemy, in another
my friend. if you can bear my incorrigible
pronunciation, we shall read a few pages."
his face, in the vivid circle of the lamp, was
undoubtedly that of an old man, though with
something indomitable and even immortal
about it. he read with slow precision two
versions of a single epic chapter. in the first, an
army marches off to battle through a mountain
wilderness; the horror of the rocks and
darkness inspires in them a disdain for life, and
they go on to an easy victory. in the second, the
same army passes through a palace in which a
ball is being held; the brilliant battle seems to
them a continuation of the fête, and they win it
easily.
i listened with honourable veneration to
those ancient fictions, which were themselves
perhaps not as remarkable as the fact that a
man of my blood had invented them and a man
of a distant empire was restoring them to me on
an island in the west in the course of a
desperate mission. i recall the final words,
repeated in each version like some secret
commandment: "thus the heroes fought, their
admirable hearts calm, their swords violent,
they themselves resigned to killing and to
dying."
from that moment on, i felt all about me and
within my obscure body an invisible, intangible
pullulation—not that of the divergent, parallel,
and finally coalescing armies, but an agitation
more inaccessible, more inward than that, yet
one those armies somehow prefigured. albert
went on:
"i do not believe that your venerable ancestor
played at idle variations. i cannot think it
probable that he would sacrifice thirteen years
to the infinite performance of a rhetorical
exercise. in your country, the novel is a
subordinate genre; at that time it was a genre
beneath contempt. ts'ui pen was a novelist of
genius, but he was also a man of letters, and
surely would not have considered himself a
mere novelist.
the testimony of his contemporaries
proclaims his metaphysical, mystical leanings—
and his life is their fullest confirmation.
philosophical debate consumes a good part of
his novel. i know that of all problems, none
disturbed him, none gnawed at him like the
unfathomable problem of time. how strange,
then, that that problem should be the only one
that does not figure in the pages of his garden.
he never even uses the word. how do you
explain that willful omission?"
i proposed several solutions—all
unsatisfactory. we discussed them; finally,
stephen albert said:
"in a riddle whose answer is chess, what is
the only word that must not be used?"
i thought for a moment.
"the word chess,' " i replied.
"exactly," albert said. "the garden of
forking paths is a huge riddle, or parable,
whose subject is time; that secret purpose
forbids ts'ui pen the merest mention of its
name. to always omit one word, to employ
awkward metaphors and obvious
circumlocutions, is perhaps the most emphatic
way of calling attention to that word. it is. at
any rate, the tortuous path chosen by the
devious ts'ui pen at each and every one of the
turnings of his inexhaustible novel. i have
compared hundreds of manuscripts, i have
corrected the errors introduced through the
negligence of copyists, i have reached a
hypothesis for the plan of that chaos, i have
reestablished, or believe i've reestablished, its
fundamental order—i have translated the entire
work; and i know that not once does the word
'time' appear. the explanation is obvious: the
garden of forking paths is an incomplete, but
not false, image of the universe as conceived by
ts'ui pen. unlike newton and schopenhauer,
your ancestor did not believe in a uniform and
absolute time; he believed in an infinite series
of times, a growing, dizzying web of divergent,
convergent, and parallel times. that fabric of
times that approach one another, fork, are
snipped off, or are simply unknown for
centuries, contains all possibilities. in most of
those times, we do not exist; in some, you exist
but i do not; in others, i do and you do not; in
others still, we both do. in this one, which the
favouring hand of chance has dealt me, you
have come to my home; in another, when you
come through my garden you find me dead; in
another, i say these same words, but i am an
error, a ghost."
"in all," i said, not without a tremble, "i am
grateful for, and i venerate, your recreation of
the garden of ts'ui pen."
"not in all," he whispered with a smile.
"time forks, perpetually, into countless futures.
in one of them, i am your enemy."
i felt again that pullulation i have
mentioned. i sensed that the dew-drenched
garden that surrounded the house was
saturated, infinitely, with invisible persons.
those persons were albert and myself—secret,
busily at work, multiform—in other dimensions
of time. i raised my eyes and the gossamer
nightmare faded. in the yellow-and-black
garden there was but a single man—but that
man was as mighty as a statue, and that man
was coming down the path, and he was capt.
richard madden.
"the future is with us," i replied, "but i am
your friend. may i look at the letter again?" 
albert rose once again. he stood tall as he
opened the drawer of the tall writing cabinet; he
turned his back to me for a moment. i had
cocked the revolver. with utmost care, i fired.
albert fell without a groan, without a sound, on
the instant. i swear that he died instantly—one
clap of thunder.
the rest is unreal, insignificant. madden
burst into the room and arrested me. i have
been sentenced to hang. i have most
abhorrently triumphed: i have communicated
to berlin the secret name of the city to be
attacked. yesterday it was bombed—i read
about it in the same newspapers that posed to
all of england the enigma of the murder of the
eminent sinologist stephen albert by a
stranger, yu tsun. the leader solved the riddle.
he knew that my problem was how to report
(over the deafening noise of the war) the name
of the city named albert, and that the only way i
could find was murdering a person of that
name. he does not know (no one can know) my
endless contrition, and my weariness. 
artifices (1944)
foreword
although less clumsily executed, the stories
in this volume are no different from those in the
volume that precedes it. two of them, perhaps,
merit some comment: "death and the
compass" and "funes, his memory." the
second is one long metaphor for insomnia. the
first, in spite of the germanic or scandinavian
names in it, takes place in a buenos aires of
dreams: the twisting "rue de toulon" is the
paseo de julio;
"triste-le-roy" is the hotel where herbert
ashe received, yet probably did not read, the
eleventh volume of an imaginary encyclopedia.
after this fiction was written, i thought it might
be worthwhile to expand the time and space the
story covers: the revenge might be bequeathed
to others, the periods of time might be
calculated in years, perhaps in centuries; the
first letter of the name might be uttered in
iceland, the second in mexico, the third in
hindustan. is there any need for me to say that
there are saints among the hasidim, and that
the sacrifice of four lives in order to obtain the
four letters that the name demands is a fantasy
dictated by the shape of my story?
postscript, 1956. 1 have added three stories
to this volume: "the south," "the cult of the
phoenix," and "the end." aside from one
character, recabarren, whose immobility and
passivity serve as contrast, nothing (or almost
nothing) in the brief course of that last story is
of my invention—everything in it is implicit in a
famous book, though i have been the first to
perceive it, or at least to declare openly that i
have. in the allegory of the phoenix, i set myself
the problem of suggesting a common act—the
secret—hesitatingly, gradually, and yet, in the
end, unequivocally; i am not sure to what
extent i have succeeded.
of "the south," which may be my best story,
i shall tell the reader only that it is possible to
read it both as a forthright narration of
novelistic events and in quite another way, as
well.
schopenhauer, de quincey, stevenson,
mauthner, shaw, chesterton, león bloy—this is
the heterogeneous list of the writers i am
continually rereading. in the christological
fantasy titled "three versions of judas," i think
i can perceive the remote influence of the last of
these. —j.l.b., buenos aires, august 29, 1944
/1956
funes, his memory*
i recall him (though i have no right to speak
that sacred verb—only one man on earth did,
and that man is dead) holding a dark
passionflower in his hand, seeing it as it had
never been seen, even had it been stared at
from the first light of dawn till the last light of
evening for an entire life-time. i recall him—his
taciturn face, its indian features, its
extraordinary remoteness —behind the
cigarette. i recall (i think) the slender, leather-
braider's fingers. i recall near those hands a
mate cup, with the coat of arms of the banda
oriental.* i recall, in the window of his house, a
yellow straw blind with some vague painted
lake scene. i clearly recall his voice—the slow,
resentful, nasal voice of the toughs of those
days, without the italian sibilants one hears
today. i saw him no more than three times, the
last time in 1887. i applaud the idea that all of
us who had dealings with the man should write
something about him; my testimony will
perhaps be the briefest (and certainly the
slightest) account in the volume that you are to
publish, but it can hardly be the least impartial.
unfortunately i am argentine, and so
congenitally unable to produce the dithyramb
that is the obligatory genre in uruguay,
especially when the subject is an uruguayan.
highbrow, dandy, city slicker —funes did not
utter those insulting words, but i know with
reasonable certainty that to him i represented
those misfortunes.
pedro leandro ipuche* has written that
funes was a precursor of the race of
supermen—"a maverick and vernacular
zarathustra"—and i will not argue the point,
but one must not forget that he was also a street
tough from fray benthos, with certain
incorrigible limitations.
my first recollection of funes is quite clear. i
see him one afternoon in march or february of
'84. that year, my father had taken me to spend
the summer in fray bentos.*i was coming back
from the ranch in san francisco with my cousin
bernardo haedo. we were riding along on our
horses, singing merrily—and being on
horseback was not the only reason for my
cheerfulness. after a sultry day, a huge slatecolored
storm, fanned by the south wind, had
curtained the sky. the wind flailed the trees
wildly, and i was filled with the fear (the hope)
that we would be surprised in the open
countryside by the elemental water. we ran a
kind of race against the storm. we turned into
the deep bed of a narrow street that ran
between two brick sidewalks built high up off
the ground. it had suddenly got dark; i heard
quick, almost secret footsteps above me—i 
raised my eyes and saw a boy running along the
narrow, broken sidewalk high above, as though
running along the top of a narrow, broken wall.
i recall the short, baggy trousers— like a
gaucho's—that he wore, the straw-soled cotton
slippers, the cigarette in the hard visage, all
stark against the now limitless storm cloud.
unexpectedly, bernardo shouted out to him—
what's the time, ireneo? without consulting
the sky, without a second's pause, the boy
replied, four minutes till eight, young
bernardo juan francisco. the voice was shrill
and mocking.
i am so absentminded that i would never
have given a second thought to the exchange
i've just reported had my attention not been
called to it by my cousin, who was prompted by
a certain local pride and the desire to seem
unfazed by the other boy's trinomial response.
he told me that the boy in the narrow street
was one ireneo funes, and that he was known
for certain eccentricities, among them shying
away from people and always knowing what
time it was, like a clock. 
he added that ireneo was the son of a village
ironing woman, maria clementina funes, and
that while some people said his father was a
doctor in the salting house (an englishman
named o'connor), others said he broke horses
or drove oxcarts for a living over in the
department of salto. the boy lived with his
mother, my cousin told me, around the corner
from villa los laureles.
in '85 and '86, we spent the summer in
montevideo; it was not until '87 that i returned
to fray bentos. naturally, i asked about
everybody i knew, and finally about
"chronometric funes."i was told he'd been
bucked off a half-broken horse on the ranch in
san francisco and had been left hopelessly
crippled. i recall the sensation of unsettling
magic that this news gave me: the only time i'd
seen him, we'd been coming home on horseback
from the ranch in san francisco, and he had
been walking along a high place. this new
event, told by my cousin bernardo, struck me as
very much like a dream confected out of
elements of the past. i was told that funes
never stirred from his cot, his eyes fixed on the
fig tree behind the house or on a spiderweb. at
dusk, he would let himself be carried to the
window.
he was such a proud young man that he
pretended that his disastrous fall had actually
been fortunate— twice i saw him, on his cot
behind the iron-barred window that crudely
underscored his prisoner-like state—once lying
motionless, with his eyes closed; the second
time motionless as well, absorbed in the
contemplation of a fragrant switch of artemisia.
it was not without some self-importance that
about that same time i had embarked upon a
systematic study of latin. in my suitcase i had
brought with me lhomond's de virisi
llustribus, quicherat's thesaurus, julius
caesar's commentaries, and an odd-numbered
volume of pliny's naturalis historia—a work
which exceeded (and still exceeds) my modest
abilities as a latinist. there are no secrets in a
small town; ireneo, in his house on the
outskirts of the town, soon learned of the arrival
of those out-landish books. he sent me a
flowery, sententious letter, reminding me of our
"lamentably ephemeral" meeting "on the
seventh of february, 1884." he dwelt briefly,
elegiacally, on the "glorious services" that my
uncle, gregorio haedo, who had died that same
year, "had rendered to his two motherlands in
the valiant battle of ituzaingo," and then he
begged that i lend him one of the books i had
brought, along with a dictionary "for a full
understanding of the text, since i must plead
ignorance of latin." he promised to return the
books to me in good condition, and
"straightway." the penmanship was perfect, the
letters exceptionally well formed; the spelling
was that recommended by andrés bello: i for y,
j for g. at first, of course, i thought it was some
sort of joke. my cousins assured me it was not,
that this "was just... just ireneo." i didn't know
whether to attribute to brazen conceit,
ignorance, or stupidity the idea that hard-won
latin needed no more teaching than a
dictionary could give; in order to fully disabuse
funes, i sent him quicherat's gradus ad
parnassum and the pliny. 
on february 14,1 received a telegram from
buenos aires urging me to return home
immediately; my father was "not at all well."
god forgive me, but the prestige of being the
recipient of an urgent telegram, the desire to
communicate to all of fray bentos the
contradiction between the negative form of the
news and the absoluteness of the adverbial
phrase, the temptation to dramatize my grief by
feigning a virile stoicism—all this perhaps
distracted me from any possibility of real pain.
as i packed my bag, i realized that i didn't have
the gradus ad parnassum and the first volume
of pliny. the saturn was to sail the next
morning; that evening, after dinner, i walked
over to funes' house. i was amazed that the
evening was no less oppressive than the day had
been.
at the honest little house, funes' mother
opened the door. she told me that ireneo was in
the back room. i shouldn't be surprised if i
found the room dark, she told me, since ireneo
often spent his off hours without lighting the
candle. i walked across the tiled patio and down 
the little hallway farther on, and came to the
second patio. there was a grapevine; the
darkness seemed to me virtually total. then
suddenly i heard ireneo's high, mocking voice.
the voice was speaking latin; with morbid
pleasure, the voice emerging from the shadows
was reciting a speech or a prayer or an
incantation. the roman syllables echoed in the
patio of hard-packed earth; my trepidation
made me think them incomprehensible, and
endless; later, during the enormous
conversation of that night, i learned they were
the first paragraph of the twenty-fourth chapter
of the seventh book of pliny's naturalis
historia. the subject of that chapter is
memory; the last words were ut nihil non
iisdem verbis redderetur auditum.
without the slightest change of voice, ireneo
told me to come in. he was lying on his cot,
smoking. i don't think i saw his face until the
sun came up the next morning; when i look
back, i believe i recall the momentary glow of
his cigarette. his room smelled vaguely musty. i
sat down; i told him about my telegram and my 
father's illness.
i come now to the most difficult point in my
story, a story whose only raison d'être (as my
readers should be told from the outset) is that
dialogue half a century ago. i will not attempt to
reproduce the words of it, which are now
forever irrecoverable. instead, i will summarize,
faithfully, the many things ireneo told me.
indirect discourse is distant and weak; i know
that i am sacrificing the effectiveness of my tale.
i only ask that my readers try to hear in their
imagination the broken and staccato periods
that astounded me that night.
ireneo began by enumerating, in both latin
and spanish, the cases of prodigious memory
cataloged in the naturalis historia: cyrus, the
king of persia, who could call all the soldiers in
his armies by name; mithridates eupator, who
meted out justice in the twenty-two languages
of the kingdom over which he ruled; simonides,
the inventor of the art of memory; metrodorus,
who was able faithfully to repeat what he had
heard, though it be but once. with obvious
sincerity, ireneo said he was amazed that such 
cases were thought to be amazing. he told me
that before that rainy afternoon when the blue
roan had bucked him off, he had been what
every man was—blind, deaf, befuddled, and
virtually devoid of memory. (i tried to remind
him how precise his perception of time, his
memory for proper names had been—he
ignored me.) he had lived, he said, for nineteen
years as though in a dream: he looked without
seeing, heard without listening, forgot
everything, or virtually everything. when he
fell, he'd been knocked unconscious; when he
came to again, the present was so rich, so clear,
that it was almost unbearable, as were his
oldest and even his most trivial memories. it
was shortly afterward that he learned he was
crippled; of that fact he hardly took notice. he
reasoned (or felt) that immobility was a small
price to pay. now his perception and his
memory were perfect.
with one quick look, you and i perceive three
wineglasses on a table; funes perceived every
grape that had been pressed into the wine and
all the stalks and tendrils of its vineyard. he
knew the forms of the clouds in the southern
sky on the morning of april 30,1882, and he
could compare them in his memory with the
veins in the marbled binding of a book he had
seen only once, or with the feathers of spray
lifted by an oar on the rio negro on the eve of
the battle of quebracho. nor were those
memories simple—every visual image was
linked to muscular sensations, thermal
sensations, and so on. he was able to
reconstruct every dream, every daydream he
had ever had. two or three times he had
reconstructed an entire day; he had never once
erred or faltered, but each reconstruction had
itself taken an entire day. "i, myself, alone,
have more memories than all mankind since
the world began," he said to me. and also: "my
dreams are like other people's waking hours."
and again, toward dawn: "my memory, sir, is
like a garbage heap." a circle drawn on a
blackboard, a right triangle, a rhombus—all
these are forms we can fully intuit; ireneo could
do the same with the stormy mane of a young
colt, a small herd of cattle on a mountainside, a 
flickering fire and its uncountable ashes, and
the many faces of a dead man at a wake. i have
no idea how many stars he saw in the sky.
those are the things he told me; neither then
nor later have i ever doubted them. at that time
there were no cinematographers, no
phonographs; it nevertheless strikes me as
implausible, even incredible, that no one ever
performed an experiment with funes. but then,
all our lives we postpone everything that can be
postponed; perhaps we all have the certainty,
deep inside, that we are immortal and that
sooner or later every man will do everything,
know all there is to know.
the voice of funes, from the darkness, went
on talking.
he told me that in 1886 he had invented a
numbering system original with himself, and
that within a very few days he had passed the
twenty-four thousand mark. he had not written
it down, since anything he thought, even once,
remained ineradicably with him. his original
motivation, i think, was his irritation that the
thirty-three uruguayan patriots* should require 
two figures and three words rather than a single
figure, a single word. he then applied this mad
principle to the other numbers. instead of seven
thousand thirteen (7013), he would say, for
instance, "máximo pérez"; instead of seven
thousand fourteen (7014), "the railroad"; other
numbers were "luis melián lafinur," "olimar,"
"sulfur," "clubs," "the whale," "gas," "a
stewpot," "napoleon," "agustín de vedia."
instead of five hundred (500), he said "nine."
every word had a particular figure attached to
it, a sort of marker; the later ones were
extremely complicated.
i tried to explain to funes that his rhapsody
of unconnected words was exactly the opposite
of a number system. i told him that when one
said "365" one said "three hundreds, six tens,
and five ones," a breakdown impossible with
the "numbers" nigger timoteo or a poncho of
meat. funes either could not or would not
understand me.
in the seventeenth century, locke postulated
(and condemned) an impossible language in
which each individual thing—every stone, every 
bird, every branch—would have its own name;
funes once contemplated a similar language,
but discarded the idea as too general, too
ambiguous. the truth was, funes remembered
not only every leaf of every tree in every patch
of forest, but every time he had perceived or
imagined that leaf. he resolved to reduce every
one of his past days to some seventy thousand
recollections, which he would then define by
numbers. two considerations dissuaded him:
the realization that the task was interminable,
and the realization that it was pointless. he saw
that by the time he died he would still not have
finished classifying all the memories of his
childhood.
the two projects i have mentioned (an
infinite vocabulary for the natural series of
numbers, and a pointless mental catalog of all
the images of his memory) are foolish, even
preposterous, but they reveal a certain halting
grandeur. they allow us to glimpse, or to infer,
the dizzying world that funes lived in. funes,
we must not forget, was virtually incapable of
general, platonic ideas. not only was it difficult 
for him to see that the generic symbol "dog"
took in all the dissimilar individuals of all
shapes and sizes, it irritated him that the "dog"
of three-fourteen in the afternoon, seen in
profile, should be indicated by the same noun
as the dog of three-fifteen, seen frontally. his
own face in the mirror, his own hands,
surprised him every time he saw them. swift
wrote that the emperor of lilliput could
perceive the movement of the minute hand of a
clock; funes could continually perceive the
quiet advances of corruption, of tooth decay, of
weariness. he saw—he noticed —the progress of
death, of humidity. he was the solitary, lucid
spectator of a multiform, momentaneous, and
almost unbearably precise world.
babylon, london, and new york dazzle
mankind's imagination with their fierce
splendor; no one in the populous towers or
urgent avenues of those cities has ever felt the
heat and pressure of a reality as inexhaustible
as that which battered ireneo, day and night, in
his poor south american hinterland. it was
hard for him to sleep. to sleep is to take one's 
mind from the world; funes, lying on his back
on his cot, in the dimness of his room, could
picture every crack in the wall, every molding of
the precise houses that surrounded him. (i
repeat that the most trivial of his memories was
more detailed, more vivid than our own
perception of a physical pleasure or a physical
torment.) off toward the east, in an area that
had not yet been cut up into city blocks, there
were new houses, unfamiliar to ireneo. he
pictured them to himself as black, compact,
made of homogeneous shadow; he would turn
his head in that direction to sleep. he would
also imagine himself at the bottom of a river,
rocked (and negated) by the current.
he had effortlessly learned english, french,
portuguese, latin. i suspect, nevertheless, that
he was not very good at thinking. to think is to
ignore (or forget) differences, to generalize, to
abstract. in the teeming world of ireneo funes
there was nothing but particulars—and they
were virtually immediate particulars.
the leery light of dawn entered the patio of
packed earth. 
it was then that i saw the face that belonged
to the voice that had been talking all night long.
ireneo was nineteen, he had been born in 1868;
he looked to me as monumental as bronze—
older than egypt, older than the prophecies and
the pyramids. i was struck by the thought that
every word i spoke, every expression of my face
or motion of my hand would endure in his
implacable memory; i was rendered clumsy by
the fear of making pointless gestures.
ireneo funes died in 1889 of pulmonary
congestion. 
the shape of the sword
his face was traversed by a vengeful scar, an
ashen and almost perfect arc that sliced from
the temple on one side of his head to his cheek
on the other. his true name does not matter;
everyone in tacuarembó called him "the
englishman at la colorada." the owner of the
land, cardoso, hadn't wanted to sell it; i heard
that the englishman plied him with an
argument no one could have foreseen—he told
him the secret history of the scar. he had come
from the border, from rio grande do sul; there
were those who said that over in brazil he had
been a smuggler. the fields had gone to grass,
the water was bitter; to put things to right, the
englishman worked shoulder to shoulder with
his peons. people say he was harsh to the point
of cruelty, but scrupulously fair. they also say
he liked his drink; once or twice a year he would
shut himself up in the room in the belvedere,
and two or three days later he would emerge as
though from a battle or a spell of dizziness—
pale, shaking, befuddled, and as authoritarian
as ever. i recall his glacial eyes, his lean energy,
his gray mustache. he was standoffish; the fact
is, his spanish was rudimentary, and tainted
with the accents of brazil. aside from the
occasional business letter or pamphlet, he got
no mail.
the last time i made a trip through the
northern provinces, high water along the
caraguatá forced me to spend the night at la
colorada. within a few minutes i thought i
sensed that my showing up that way was
somehow inopportune. i tried to ingratiate
myself with the englishman, and to do so i
seized upon patriotism, that least discerning of
passions. i remarked that a country with
england's spirit was invincible. my interlocutor
nodded, but added with a smile that he wasn't
english—he was irish, from dungarvan. that
said, he stopped, as though he had let slip a
secret.
we went outside after dinner to have a look
at the sky. the clouds had cleared away, but far
off behind the sharp peaks, the southern sky,
creviced and split with lightning, threatened
another storm. back in the dilapidated dining
room, the peon who'd served dinner brought
out a bottle of rum. we drank for a long time, in
silence.
i am not sure what time it was when i
realized that i was drunk; i don't know what
inspiration or elation or boredom led me to
remark on my host's scar. his face froze; for
several seconds i thought he was going to eject
me from the house. but at last, his voice
perfectly ordinary, he said to me:
"i will tell you the story of my scar under one
condition—that no contempt or condemnation
be withheld, no mitigation for any iniquity be
pleaded."
i agreed. this is the story he told, his english
interspersed with spanish, and even with
portuguese: in 1922, in one of the cities of
connaught, i was one of the many young men
who were conspiring to win ireland's
independence. of my companions there, some
are still living, working for peace; others,
paradoxically, are fighting under english
colours, at sea or in the desert; one, the best of 
us all, was shot at dawn in the courtyard of a
prison, executed by men filled with dreams;
others (and not the least fortunate, either) met
their fate in the anonymous, virtually secret
battles of the civil war. we were republicans
and catholics; we were, i suspect, romantics.
for us, ireland was not just the utopian future
and the unbearable present; it was a bitter yet
loving mythology, it was the circular towers and
red bogs, it was the repudiation of parnell, and
it was the grand epics that sing the theft of bulls
that were heroes in an earlier incarnation, and
in other incarnations fish, and mountains. ...
one evening i shall never forget, there came to
us a man, one of our own, from munster—a
man called john vincent moon.
he couldn't have been more than twenty. he
was thin yet slack-muscled, all at once—he gave
the uncomfortable impression of being an
invertebrate. he had studied, ardently and with
some vanity, virtually every page of one of those
communist manuals; he would haul out his
dialectical materialism to cut off any argument.
there are infinite reasons a man may have for 
hating or loving another man; moon reduced
the history of the world to one sordid economic
conflict. he declared that the revolution was
foreordained to triumph. i replied that only lost
causes were of any interest to a gentleman....
night had fallen; we pursued our crosspurposes
in the hallway, down the stairs, then
through the vague streets.
the verdicts moon handed down impressed
me considerably less than the sense of
unappealable and absolute truth with which he
issued them. the new comrade did not argue,
he did not debate—he pronounced judgement,
contemptuously and, to a degree, wrathfully.
as we came to the last houses of the city that
night, we were stupefied by the sudden sound of
gunfire.
(before this, or afterward, we skirted the
blind wall of a factory or a gaol.) we turned
down a dirt street; a soldier, huge in the glare,
burst out of a torched cottage. he shouted at us
to halt. i started walking faster; my comrade did
not follow me. i turned around— john vincent
moon was standing as motionless as a rabbit
caught in one's headlights—eternalized,
somehow, by terror. i ran back, floored the
soldier with a single blow, shook vincent moon,
cursed him, and ordered him to come with me.
i had to take him by the arm; the passion of fear
had stripped him of all will. but then we did
run—we fled through the conflagration-riddled
night. a burst of rifle fire came our way, and a
bullet grazed moon's right shoulder; as we fled
through the pine trees, a weak sob racked his
breast.
in that autumn of 1922 i had gone more or
less underground, and was living in general
berkeley's country house. the general (whom i
had never seen) was at that time posted to some
administrative position or other out in bengal;
the house was less than a hundred years old but
it was gloomy and dilapidated and filled with
perplexing corridors and pointless
antechambers. the museum-cabinet and huge
library arrogated to themselves the entire lower
floor—there were the controversial and
incompatible books that are somehow the
history of the nineteenth century; there were
scimitars from nishapur, in whose frozen
crescents the wind and violence of battle
seemed to be living on. we entered the house (i
think i recall) through the rear. moon, shaking,
his mouth dry, mumbled that the events of the
night had been "interesting"; i salved and
bandaged him, then brought him a cup of tea.
the wound was superficial. suddenly, puzzled,
he stammered:
"you took a terrible chance, coming back to
save me like that."
i told him it was nothing. (it was the habit of
civil war that impelled me to act as i acted;
besides, the imprisonment of a single one of us
could imperil the entire cause.)
the next day, moon had recovered his
composure. he accepted a cigarette and
subjected me to a harsh interrogation as to the
"financial resources of our revolutionary party."
his questions were quite lucid; i told him
(truthfully) that the situation was grave. deep
rumblings of gunfire troubled the peace of the
south. i told moon that our comrades were
waiting for us. my overcoat and revolver were 
up in my room; when i returned, i found moon
lying on the sofa, his eyes closed. he thought he
had a fever; he pleaded a painful spasm in his
shoulder.
it was then that i realized he was a hopeless
coward. i clumsily told him to take care of
himself, then left.
i was embarrassed by the man and his fear,
shamed by him, as though i myself were the
coward, not vincent moon. whatsoever one
man does, it is as though all men did it. that is
why it is not unfair that a single act of
disobedience in a garden should contaminate
all humanity; that is why it is not unfair that a
single jew's crucifixion should be enough to
save it. schopenhauer may have been right—i
am other men, any man is all men, shakespeare
is somehow the wretched john vincent moon.
we spent nine days in the general's great
house. of the agonies and the rays of light of
that dark war i shall say nothing; my purpose is
to tell the story of this scar that affronts me. in
my memory, those nine days form a single
day—except for the next to last, when our men 
stormed a barracks and avenged, life for life,
our sixteen comrades fallen to the machine
guns at elphin. i would slip out of the house
about dawn, in the blurred confusion of first
light. i would be back toward nightfall. my
comrade would be waiting for me upstairs; his
wound would not allow him to come down.
when i look back, i see him with some book of
strategy in his hand—f. n. maude, or
clausewitz. "the weapon of preference for me,"
he confessed to me one night, "is artillery." he
enquired into our plans; he enjoyed criticizing
or re-thinking them. he was also much given to
deploring "our woeful financial base";
dogmatically and sombrely he would prophesy
the disastrous end. "c'est une affaire flambée,"
he would mutter. to shcw that his physical
cowardice was a matter of indifference to him,
he made a great display of mental arrogance.
thus passed, well or not so well, nine days.
on the tenth, the city fell once and forever
into the hands of the black and tans. highsitting,
silent horsemen patrolled their beats;
there was ash and smoke in the wind. i saw a
dead body sprawled on one corner—yet that
dead body is less vivid in my memory than the
dummy that the soldiers endlessly practised
their marksmanship on in the middle of the city
square.... i had gone out when dawn was just
streaking the sky; before noon, i was back.
moon was in the library, talking to someone; i
realized from the tone of his voice that he was
speaking on the telephone. then i heard my
name; then, that i'd be back at seven, and then,
that i'd be arrested as i came across the lawn.
my rational friend was rationally selling me out.
i heard him demand certain guarantees of his
own safety.
here my story becomes confused and peters
out a bit. i know that i chased the snitch
through black corridors of nightmare and steep
stairwells of vertigo. moon knew the house well,
every bit as well as i.
once or twice i lost him, but i managed to
corner him before the soldiers arrested me.
from one of the general's suits of armor, i
seized a scimitar, and with that steel crescent
left a flourish on his face forever—a half-moon 
of blood. to you alone, borges—you who are a
stranger—i have made this confession.
your contempt is perhaps not so painful.”
here the narrator halted. i saw that his
hands were trembling.
"and moon?" i asked. "what became of
moon?"
"he was paid his judas silver and he ran off
to brazil. that evening, in the city square, i saw
a dummy shot by a firing squad of drunks."
i waited vainly for the rest of the story.
finally, i asked him to go on.
a groan made his entire body shiver; he
gestured, feebly, gently, toward the curving
whitish scar.
"do you not believe me?" he stammered. "do
you not see set upon my face the mark of my
iniquity? i have told you the story this way so
that you would hear it out. it was i who
betrayed the man who saved me and gave me
shelter—it is i who am vincent moon. now,
despise me."
1942
the theme of the traitor and the hero
so the platonic year
whirls out new right and wrong
whirls in the old instead;
all men are dancers and their tread
goes to the barbarous clangour of a gong.
 —w. b. yeats, the tower
under the notorious influence of chesterton
(inventor and embellisher of elegant mysteries)
and the court counselor leibniz (who invented
pre-established harmony), in my spare evenings
i have conceived this plot—which i will perhaps
commit to paper but which already somehow
justifies me. it needs details, rectifications,
tinkering—there are areas of the story that have
never been revealed to me. today, january 3,
1944, i see it in the following way:
the action takes place in an oppressed yet
stubborn country—poland, ireland, the republic
of venice, some south american or balkan
state.... or took place rather, for though the
narrator is contemporary, the story told by him
occurred in the mid or early nineteenth
century—in 1824, let us say, for convenience's
sake; in ireland, let us also say. the narrator is
a man named ryan, the great-grandson of the
young, heroic, beautiful, murdered fergus
kilpatrick, whose grave was mysteriously
violated, whose name gives luster to browning's
and hugo's verses, and whose statue stands
high upon a gray hilltop among red bogs.
kilpatrick was a conspirator and a secret and
glorious captain of conspirators. like moses,
who from the land of moab glimpsed yet could
not reach the promised land, kilpatrick
perished on the eve of the victorious rebellion
he had planned for and dreamed of. the date of
the first centenary of his death is approaching;
the circumstances of the crime are enigmatic;
ryan, who is writing a biography of the hero,
discovers that the enigma goes deeper than
mere detective work can fathom. kilpatrick was
murdered in a theater; the english police never
apprehended the assassin. historians claim that 
this failure does not tarnish the good name of
the police, since it is possible that the police
themselves had kilpatrick murdered. other
aspects of the mystery disturb ryan; certain
things seem almost cyclical, seem to repeat or
combine events from distant places, distant
ages. for example: everyone knows that the
constables who examined the hero's body found
a sealed letter warning kilpatrick not to go to
the theater that night; julius caesar, too, as he
was walking toward the place where the knives
of his friends awaited him, received a note he
never read—a note telling him of his betrayal
and revealing the names of his betrayers.
caesar's wife, calpurnia, saw in dreams a tower
felled by order of the senate; on the eve of
kilpatrick's death, false and anonymous rumors
of the burning of the circular tower of kilgarvan
spread throughout the country—an event that
might be taken as an omen, since kilpatrick had
been born in kilgarvan. these (and other)
parallels between the story of julius caesar and
the story of an irish conspirator induce ryan to
imagine some secret shape of time, a pattern of 
repeating lines. his thoughts turn to the
decimal history conceived by condorcet, the
morphologies proposed by hegel, spengler, and
vico, mankind as posited by hesiod,
degenerating from gold to iron. he thinks of the
transmigration of souls, a doctrine that lends
horror to celtic literature and that caesar
himself attributed to the druids of britain; he
toys with the idea that before fergus kilpatrick
was fergus kilpatrick, he was julius caesar. he
is saved from those circular labyrinths by a
curious discovery, a discovery which, however,
will plunge him deep into other, yet more
tangled and heterogeneous mazes: it seems that
certain words spoken by a beggar who spoke
with fergus kilpatrick on the day of his death
had been pre-figured by shakespeare, in
macbeth. the idea that history might have
copied history is mind-boggling enough; that
history should copy literature is inconceivable--
---ryan digs further, and he finds that in 1814
james alexander nolan, the oldest of the hero's
comrades, had translated shakespeare's major
plays into gaelic—among them julius caesar.
he also finds in the archives a manuscript
article by nolan on the swiss festspiele — vast
peripatetic theatrical performances that require
thousands of actors and retell historical
episodes in the same cities, the same mountains
in which they occurred. another unpublished
document reveals to ryan that a few days
before the end, kilpatrick, presiding over the
last gathering of his chiefs, had signed the death
sentence of a traitor, whose name has been
scratched out.
this sentence does not jibe with kilpatrick's
customary mercifulness. ryan investigates the
matter (his investigation being one of the gaps
in the book's narration) and manages to
decipher the enigma.
kilpatrick was murdered in a theater, yet the
entire city played the role of theater, too, and
the actors were legion, and the play that was
crowned by kilpatrick's death took place over
many days and many nights. here is what
happened:
on august 2, 1824, the conspirators met. the
country was ripe for rebellion; something,
however, always went awry—there must have
been a traitor within the inner circle. fergus
kilpatrick had given james nolan the job of
ferreting out the identity of this traitor, and
nolan had carried out his mission. he
announced to the gathered comrades that the
traitor was kilpatrick himself. he proved the
truth of his accusation beyond the shadow of a
doubt, and the men at the council that night
condemned their leader to death. the leader
signed his own death sentence, but he pleaded
that his punishment not harm the cause.
and so it was that nolan conceived a strange
plan. ireland idolized kilpatrick; the slightest
suspicion of his baseness would have
compromised the rebellion; nolan proposed a
way to turn the traitor's execution into an
instrument for the emancipation of the country.
he proposed that the condemned man die at
the hands of an unknown assassin in
deliberately dramatic circumstances; those
circumstances would engrave themselves upon
the popular imagination and hasten the
rebellion. kilpatrick swore to collaborate in this 
plan which would give him an occasion to
redeem himself, and which would be crowned
by his death.
nolan had no time to invent the
circumstances of the multiple execution from
scratch, and so he plagiarized the scene from
another playwright, the english enemy will
shakespeare, reprising scenes from macbeth
and julius caesar. the public yet secret
performance occurred over several days. the
condemned man entered dublin, argued,
worked, prayed, reprehended, spoke words of
pathos—and each of those acts destined to
shine forth in glory had been choreographed by
nolan. hundreds of actors collaborated with
the protagonist; the role of some was complex,
the role of others a matter of moments on the
stage. the things they did and said endure in
ireland's history books and in its impassioned
memory. kilpatrick, moved almost to ecstasy by
the scrupulously plotted fate that would redeem
him and end his days, more than once enriched
his judge's text with improvised words and acts.
thus the teeming drama played itself out in 
time, until that august 6, 1824, in a box
(prefiguring lincoln's) draped with funereal
curtains, when a yearned-for bullet pierced the
traitor-hero's breast. between two spurts of
sudden blood, kilpatrick could hardly
pronounce the few words given him to speak.
in nolan's play, the passages taken from
shakespeare are the least dramatic ones; ryan
suspected that the author interpolated them so
that someone, in the future, would be able to
stumble upon the truth.
ryan realized that he, too, was part of
nolan's plot.... after long and stubborn
deliberation, he decided to silence the
discovery. he published a book dedicated to the
hero's glory; that too, perhaps, had been
foreseen. 
death and the compass
for manage molina vedia
of the many problems on which lönnrot’s
reckless perspicacity was exercised, none was so
strange—so rigorously strange, one might say—
as the periodic series of bloody deeds that
culminated at the villa triste-le-roy, amid the
perpetual fragrance of the eucalyptus. it is true
that erik lönnrot did not succeed in preventing
the last crime, but he did, indisputably, foresee
it. nor did he divine the identity of
yarmolinsky's unlucky murderer, but he did
perceive the evil series' secret shape and the
part played in it by red scharlach, whose
second sobriquet is scharlach the dandy. that
criminal (like so many others) had sworn upon
his honor to kill lönnrot, but lönnrot never
allowed himself to be intimidated. he thought
of himself as a reasoning machine, an auguste
dupin, but there was something of the
adventurer in him, even something of the
gambler.
the first crime occurred in the hôtel du
nord, that tall prism sitting high above the
estuary whose waters are the color of the desert.
to that tower (which is notorious for uniting in
itself the abhorrent whiteness of a sanatorium,
the numbered divisibility of a prison, and the
general appearance of a house of ill repute)
there came, on december 3, the delegate from
podolsk to the third talmudic congress — dr.
marcelo yarmolinsky, a man of gray beard and
gray eyes. we will never know whether he
found the hôtel du nord to his liking; he
accepted it with the ancient resignation that
had allowed him to bear three years of war in
the carpathians and three thousand years of
pogroms and oppression. he was given a room
on r floor, across the hall from the suite
occupied—not without some splendor—by the
tetrarch of galilee. yarmolinsky had dinner,
put off till the next day his examination of the
unfamiliar city, set out his many books and very
few articles of jewelry on a bureau, and, before
midnight, turned off the light. (thus testified
the tetrarch's driver, who was sleeping in the
adjoining room.) on the fourth, at 11:30a.m., a 
writer for the yiddische zeitung telephoned
yarmolinsky, but dr. yarmolinsky did not
answer. he was found lying on the floor of his
room, his face by now slightly discolored, his
body almost naked beneath an anachronistic
cape. he was lying not far from the door to the
hallway; a deep knife wound had rent his chest.
a couple of hours later, in the same room,
standing amid journalists, photographers, and
gendarmes, police commissioner treviranus
and lönnrot serenely discussed the problem.
"no need to go off on wild-goose chases
here," treviranus was saying, as he brandished
an imperious cigar. "we all know that the
tetrarch of galilee owns the finest sapphires in
the world. somebody intending to steal the
sapphires broke in here by mistake.
yarmolinsky woke up, the burglar had to kill
him. —what do you think?"
"possible, but uninteresting, "lönnrot
replied. "you will reply that reality has not the
slightest obligation to be interesting. i will reply
in turn that reality may get along without that
obligation, but hypotheses may not. in the
hypothesis that you suggest, here, on the spur
of the moment, chance plays a disproportionate
role. what we have here is a dead rabbi; i would
prefer a purely rabbinical explanation, not the
imaginary bunglings of an imaginary burglar."
treviranus' humor darkened.
"i'm not interested in 'rabbinical
explanations,' as you call them; what i'm
interested in is catching the blackguard that
stabbed this unknown man."
"unknown?" asked lönnrot. "here are his
complete works." he gestured to the bureau
with its row of tall books: a vindication of the
kabbalah; a study of the philosophy of robert
fludd; a literal translation of the sefer
yetsirah; a biography of the baal shem; a
history of the hasidim; a monograph in
german on the tetragrammaton; another on
the divine nomenclature of the pentateuch. the
commissioner looked at them with fear, almost
with revulsion. then he laughed.
"i'm a poor christian fellow," he replied.
"you can take those things home with you, if
you want them; i can't be wasting my time on 
jewish superstitions."
"this crime may, however, belong to the
history of jewish superstitions," lönnrot
muttered.
"as christianity does," the writer from the
yiddische zeitung added, scathingly. he was
nearsighted, quite shy, and an atheist.
no one answered him. in the little
typewriter, one of the agents had found a slip of
paper, with this unfinished declaration:
the first letter of the name has been
written.
lönnrot resisted a smile. suddenly turned
bibliophile or hebraist, he ordered one of the
officers to wrap up the dead man's books, and
he took them to his apartment. then,
indifferent to the police investigation, he set
about studying them. one book, an octavo
volume, revealed to him the teachings of israel
baal shem tov, the founder of the sect of the
pious; another, the virtues and terrors of the
tetragrammaton, the ineffable name of god;
yet another, the notion that god has a secret
name, which (much like the crystal sphere
attributed by the persians to alexander of
macedonia) contains his ninth attribute, the
eternity—that is, immediate knowledge— of all
things that shall be, are, and have been in the
universe. tradition reckons the names of god at
ninety-nine; while hebraists attribute that
imperfect sum to the magical fear of even
numbers, the hasidim argue that the lacuna
points toward a hundredth name — the
absolute name.
from his erudition lönnrot was distracted, a
few days later, by the writer from the yiddische
zeitung. the young man wanted to talk about
the murder; lönnrot preferred to talk about the
many names of god.
the journalist filled three columns with the
story that the famed detective erik lönnrot had
taken up the study of the names of god in order
to discover the name of the murderer. lönnrot,
accustomed to journalists' simplifications, did
not take offense. one of those shopkeepers who
have found that any given man may be
persuaded to buy any given book published a
popular edition of a history of the hasidim.
the second crime took place on the night of
january 3, in the emptiest and most
godforsaken of the echoing suburbs on the
western outskirts of the capital. sometime
around dawn, one of the mounted gendarmes
that patrolled the solitudes of those blocks saw
a man, wrapped in a poncho, lying in the
doorway of an old paint factory. his hard face
looked as though it were wearing a mask of
blood; a deep knife wound split his chest. on
the wall, across the red and yellow rhombuses,
someone had chalked some words, which the
gendarme spelled out to himself.... that
afternoon, treviranus and lönnrot made their
way to the distant scene of the crime. to the left
and right of their automobile, the city crumbled
away; the sky expanded, and now houses held
less and less importance, a brick kiln or a
poplar tree more and more. they came to their
miserable destination; a final alleyway lined
with pink-colored walls that somehow seemed
to reflect the rambunctious setting of the sun.
by this time, the dead man had been identified. 
he was daniel simón azevedo, a man of some
reputation in the old slums of the northside,
where he had risen from wagon driver to
election-day thug, only to degenerate thereafter
into a thief and even an informer. (the singular
manner of his death seemed fitting: azevedo
was the last representative of a generation of
outlaws who used a knife but not a revolver.)
the chalked words read as follows:
the second letter of the name has been
written.
the third crime took place on the night of
february 3. a few minutes before one, the
telephone rang in commissioner treviranus'
office. keenly secretive, the guttural voice of a
man came on the line; he told the commissioner
his name was ginzberg (or ginsburg) and said
that for a reasonable fee he was willing to reveal
certain details of the two sacrifices, azevedo's
and yarmolinsky's. a cacophony of whistles and
party horns drowned out the informer's voice.
then, the line went dead. without discarding
the possibility of a prank (it was carnival time, 
after all), treviranus made inquiries and found
that the call had come from liverpool house, a
tavern on the rue de toulon—that brackish
street shared by a popular museum of wonders
and a milk store, a brothel and a company of
bible sellers. treviranus telephoned the owner
of the place—black finnegan, former irish
criminal now overwhelmed, almost crushed, by
honesty. finnegan told treviranus that the last
person to use the telephone in the tavern had
been a tenant, one gryphius, who'd just gone
out with some friends. treviranus drove
immediately to liverpool house.
the owner had the following to say: eight
days earlier, gryphius—a man with sharp
features, a nebulous gray beard, and a
nondescript black suit—had rented a room
above the bar. finnegan (who generally put the
room to a use that treviranus had no difficulty
guessing) had named an exorbitant rent;
gryphius had unhesitatingly paid it. he almost
never left the room; he had both lunch and
dinner there and hardly ever showed his face in
the bar. that night he had come down to
finnegan's office to make a call. a closed coupe
had stopped in front of the tavern. the driver
hadn't left the driver's seat; some of the
customers recalled that he was wearing a bear
mask. two harlequin figures got out of the car;
they were short, and no one could fail to notice
that they were drunk. they burst into
finnegan's office, party horns bleating, and
threw their arms around gryphius, who
apparently recognized them but greeted them
somewhat coldly. they exchanged a few words
in yiddish—gryphius in a low, guttural voice,
the harlequins in a sort of falsetto—and then all
went up to gryphius' room. fifteen minutes
later the three men came down again, quite
happy; gryphius was staggering, and seemed to
be as drunk as the others.
tall and unsteady, his head apparently
spinning, he was in the middle, between the
masked harlequins.
(one of the women in the bar recalled the
yellow, red, and green lozenges.) twice he
stumbled; twice the harlequins steadied him.
the three men got into the coupe and
disappeared in the direction of the nearby pier,
with its rectangular water. but just as he
stepped on the running board of the car, the last
harlequin scrawled an obscene figure and a
sentence on one of the blackboards in the
entryway.
treviranus looked at the sentence, but it was
almost predictable:
the last letter of the name has been written.
then he examined gryphius-ginsburg's little
room. on the floor, there was a brusque star, in
blood; in the corners, the remains of cigarettes,
hungarian; on a bureau, a book in latin—
leusden's philologus hebrœogrœcus (1739)—
with several handwritten notes. treviranus
looked at it indignantly, and sent for lönnrot.
lönnrot did not take his hat off before plunging
into the book, while the commissioner
interrogated the contradictory witnesses to the
possible kidnapping. at four they left. out in
the twisting rue de toulon, as they walked
through the dawn's dead streamers and
confetti, treviranus said: 
"what if tonight's story were a sham, a
simulacrum?"
erik lönnrot smiled and in a grave voice
read the commissioner a passage (which had
been underlined) from the philologus' thirtythird
dissertation: dies judœorum incipita
solis occasu usque ad soils occasum diei
sequentis. "which means," he added, " 'the
jewish day begins at sundown and lasts until
sundown of the following day.' "
the other man made an attempt at irony.
"and is that the most valuable piece of
information you've picked up tonight, then?"
"no. the most valuable piece of information
is the word ginsburg used."
the afternoon papers had not overlooked
these periodic deaths and disappearances. the
cross and sword contrasted them with the
admirable discipline and order of the last
hermetic congress; ernst palast of the martyr
denounced "the intolerable delays of a
clandestine and niggardly pogrom, which has
taken three months to wipe out three jews"; the
yiddische zeitung rejected the horrifying theory 
of an anti-semitic conspiracy, "though many
insightful spirits will hear of no other solution
for the triple mystery"; the most famous
gunman of the southside, dandy red
scharlach, swore that in his territory no crime
such as that had ever taken place, and he
accused police commissioner franz treviranus
of criminal negligence.
on march 1, this same treviranus received
an impressive-looking sealed envelope. he
opened it; it contained a letter signed "baruch
spinoza" and a detailed map of the city, clearly
torn out of a baedeker.
the letter predicted that on the third of
march there would not be a fourth crime,
because the paint factory in the west, the tavern
on the rue de toulon, and the hôtel du nord
were "the perfect points of a mystical,
equilateral triangle"; red ink on the map
demonstrated its regularity. treviranus read
over that argument-by-geometry resignedly and
then sent both letter and map to lönnrot's
house, lönnrot indisputably being a man who
deserved this sort of claptrap. 
erik lönnrot studied the map and letter. the
three locations were indeed equidistant.
symmetry in time (december 3, january 3,
february 3); symmetry in space, as
well...lönnrot sensed, abruptly, that he was on
the brink of solving the riddle. a drawingcompass
and a navigational compass completed
that sudden intuition. he smiled, spoke the
word tetragrammaton (a word he had recently
acquired), and telephoned the commissioner.
"thanks for that equilateral triangle you sent
me last night. it was what i needed to solve the
puzzle. tomorrow, friday, the perpetrators will
be in prison; we can relax."
"then they're not planning a fourth crime?"
"it's precisely because they are planning a
fourth crime that we can relax," lönnrot said as
he hung up.
an hour later, he was riding on a southern
railway train toward the abandoned villa
triste-le-roy.
south of the city of my story flows a sluggish
stream of muddy water, choked with refuse and
thick with the runoff of tanneries. on the other 
side is a suburb filled with factories where,
under the protection of a barcelona gangster,
gunmen prosper. lönnrot smiled to think that
the most famous of these criminals—red
scharlach—would have given anything to know
about his clandestine visit. azevedo had been
one of scharlach's gang; lönnrot considered the
remote possibility that scharlach was to be the
fourth victim, but then rejected it.... he had
virtually solved the problem; the mere
circumstances, the reality (names, arrests,
faces, the paperwork of trial and
imprisonment), held very little interest for him
now. he wanted to go for a walk, he wanted a
respite from the three months of sedentary
investigation. he reflected that the explanation
for the crimes lay in an anonymous triangle and
a dusty greek word. the mystery seemed so
crystal clear to him now, he was embarrassed to
have spent a hundred days on it.
the train stopped at a silent loading
platform. lönnrot got off. it was one of those
deserted evenings that have the look of dawn.
the air of the murky plains was wet and cold.
lönnrot began to walk cross-country. he saw
dogs, he saw a van or lorry in a dead-end
alleyway, he saw the horizon, he saw a silvery
horse lapping at the rank water of a puddle. it
was growing dark when he saw the rectangular
belvedere of villa triste-le-roy, which stood
almost as high as the black eucalyptus trees that
surrounded it. the thought occurred to him
that one dawn and one sunset (an ancient glow
in the east and another in the west) were all
that separated him from the hour yearned for
by the seekers of the name.
a rusty fence defined the irregular perimeter
of the villa's grounds. the main gate was closed.
lönnrot, with no great expectation of finding a
way in, walked all the way around. back at the
impregnable gate, he stuck his hand almost
mechanically between the bars and came upon
the latch. the creaking of the iron startled him.
with laborious passivity, the entire gate yielded.
lönnrot made his way forward through the
eucalyptus trees, treading upon confused
generations of stiff red leaves. seen at closer
quarters, the house belonging to the villa
triste-le-roy abounded in pointless symmetries
and obsessive repetitions; a glacial diana in a
gloomy niche was echoed by a second diana in
a second niche; one balcony was reflected in
another; double stairways opened into a double
balustrade. a two-faced hermes threw a
monstrous shadow. lönnrot walked all around
the outside of the house as he had made the
circuit of the villa's grounds. he inspected
everything; under the level of the terrace, he
spotted a narrow shutter.
he pushed at it; two or three marble steps
descended into a cellar. lönnrot, who by now
had a sense of the architect's predilections,
guessed that there would be another set of steps
in the opposite wall. he found them, climbed
them, raised his hands, and opened the
trapdoor out.
a glowing light led him toward a window.
this he also opened; a round yellow moon
defined two leaf-clogged fountains in the dreary
garden. lönnrot explored the house. through
foyers that opened onto dining rooms and on
through galleries, he would emerge into
identical courtyards—often the same courtyard.
he climbed dusty stairs to circular
antechambers; he would recede infinitely in the
facing mirrored walls; he wearied of opening or
half opening windows that revealed to him,
outside, the same desolate garden from
differing heights and differing angles—inside,
the furnishings in yellowing covers, chandeliers
swathed in muslin. a bedchamber stopped him;
there, a single flower in a porcelain vase; at the
first brush of his fingertips, the ancient petals
crumbled. on the second floor, on the
uppermost floor, the house seemed infinite yet
still growing. the house is not so large, he
thought. it seems larger because of its dimness,
its symmetry, its mirrors, its age, my
unfamiliarity with it, and this solitude.
a stairway took him to the belvedere. the
moonlight of the evening shone through the
lozenges of the windows; they were yellow, red,
and green. he was stopped by an astonished,
dizzying recollection.
two fierce, stocky men leaped upon him and
disarmed him; another, quite tall, greeted him 
gravely: "you are so kind. you have saved us a
night and a day."
it was red scharlach. the men tied
lönnrot's hands. lönnrot at last found his
voice.
"scharlach— you are looking for the secret
name?"
scharlach stood there, impassive. he had not
participated in the brief struggle, and now
moved only to put out his hand for lönnrot's
revolver. but then he spoke, and lönnrot heard
in his voice a tired triumphance, a hatred as
large as the universe, a sadness no smaller than
that hatred.
"no," he said. "i am looking for something
more fleeting and more perishable than that—i
am looking for erik lönnrot. three years ago,
in a gambling den on the rue de toulon, you
arrested my brother and saw that he was sent to
prison. my men rescued me from the shoot-out
in a coupe, but not before i'd received a
policeman's bullet in my gut. nine days and
nine nights i lay between life and death in this
desolate symmetrical villa, consumed by fever, 
and that hateful two-faced janus that looks
toward the sunset and the dawn lent horror to
my deliriums and my sleeplessness. i came to
abominate my own body, i came to feel that two
eyes, two hands, two lungs are as monstrous as
two faces. an irishman tried to convert me to
belief in christ; he would repeat, over and over,
the goyim's saying: all roads lead to rome. at
night, my delirium would grow fat upon that
metaphor: i sensed that the world was a
labyrinth, impossible to escape— for all roads,
even if they pretended to lead north or south,
returned finally to rome, which was also the
rectangular prison where my brother lay dying,
and which was also the villa triste-le-roy.
during those nights, i swore by the god that
sees with two faces, and by all the gods of fever
and of mirrors, to weave a labyrinth around the
man who had imprisoned my brother. i have
woven it, and it has stood firm: its materials are
a dead heresiologue, a compass, an eighthcentury
cult, a greek word, a dagger, the
rhombuses of a paint factory....
"the first term of the series was given me
quite by chance. with some friends of mine—
among them daniel azevedo—i had figured out
a way to steal the tetrarch's sapphires. azevedo,
however, double-crossed us; he got drunk on
the money we had advanced him and pulled the
job a day early. but then he got lost in that huge
hotel, and sometime around two o'clock in the
morning he burst into yarmolinsky's room.
yarmolinsky, who suffered from insomnia, was
sitting at his typewriter typing. as coincidence
would have it, he was making some notes, or
writing an article perhaps, on the name of god;
he had just typed the words the first letter of
the name has been written. azevedo told him
to keep quiet; yarmolinsky put out his hand
toward the bell that would wake everyone in the
hotel; azevedo stabbed him once in the chest.
the movement was almost reflexive; a half
century of violence had taught him that the
easiest and safest way is simply to kill.... ten
days later i learned from the yiddische zeitung
that you were trying to find the key to
yarmolinsky's death among yarmolinsky's
writings. i read a history of the hasidim; i 
learned that the reverent fear of speaking the
name of god had been the origin of the
doctrine that that name is omnipotent and
occult. i learned that some hasidim, in the
quest for that secret name, had gone so far as to
commit human sacrifice.... i realized that you
would conjecture that the hasidim had
sacrificed the rabbi; i set about justifying that
conjecture.
"marcelo yarmolinsky died on the night of
december third; i chose the third of january for
the second 'sacrifice.' yarmolinsky died in the
north; for the second 'sacrifice,' the death
should take place in the west. daniel azevedo
was the necessary victim. he deserved to die; he
was a man that acted on impulse and he was a
traitor—if he were captured, he could destroy
my plan. one of my men stabbed him; in order
to link his body to the first one, i wrote the
second letter of the name has been written
across the rhombuses of the paint factory.
"the third 'crime' was committed on the
third of february. it was, as treviranus
guessed, a mere sham, a simulacrum. i am
gryphius-ginzberg-ginsburg; i spent one
interminable week (supplemented by a tissuethin
false beard) in that perverse cubicle on the
rue de toulon, until my friends kidnapped me.
standing on the running board of the coupe,
one of them scrawled on a pillar the words that
you recall: the last letter of the name has been
written. that sentence revealed that this was a
series of three crimes. at least that was how the
man in the street interpreted it—but i had
repeatedly dropped clues so that you, the
reasoning erik lönnrot, would realize that
there were actually four. one sign in the north,
two more in the east and west, demand a fourth
sign in the south—after all, the
tetragrammaton, the name of god, yhvh,
consists of four letters; the harlequins and the
paint manufacturer's emblem suggest four
terms. it was i who underlined that passage in
leusden's book. the passage says that jews
compute the day from sunset to sunset; the
passage therefore gives one to understand that
the deaths occurred on the fourth of each
month. it was i who sent the equilateral triangle 
to treviranus. i knew you would add the
missing point, the point that makes a perfect
rhombus, the point that fixes the place where a
precise death awaits you. i have done all this,
erik lönnrot, planned all this, in order to draw
you to the solitudes of triste-le-roy."
lönnrot avoided scharlach's eyes. he looked
at the trees and the sky subdivided into murky
red, green, and yellow rhombuses. he felt a
chill, and an impersonal, almost anonymous
sadness. the night was dark now; from the
dusty garden there rose the pointless cry of a
bird. for the last time, lönnrot considered the
problem of the symmetrical, periodic murders.
"there are three lines too many in your
labyrinth," he said at last. "i know of a greek
labyrinth that is but one straight line. so many
philosophers have been lost upon that line that
a mere detective might be pardoned if he
became lost as well. when you hunt me down in
another avatar of our lives, scharlach, i suggest
that you fake (or commit) one crime at a, a
second crime at b, eight kilometers from a,
then a third crime at c, four kilometers from a 
and b and halfway between them. then wait for
me at d, two kilometers from a and c, once
again halfway between them. kill me at d, as
you are about to kill me at triste-le-roy."
"the next time i kill you," scharlach replied,
"i promise you the labyrinth that consists of a
single straight line that is invisible and endless."
he stepped back a few steps. then, very
carefully, he fired.
1942
the secret miracle
and god caused him to die for an hundred
years, and then raised him to life. and god said,
"how long hast thou waited?" he said, "i have
waited a day or part of a day."
qur'an, 2:261
on the night of march 14, 1939, in an
apartment on prague's zeltnergasse, jaromir
hladik, author of the unfinished tragedy the 
enemies, a book titled a vindication of
eternity, and a study of jakob boehme's
indirect jewish sources, dreamed of a long
game of chess. the game was played not by two
individuals, but by two illustrious families; it
had been started many centuries in the past. no
one could say what the forgotten prize was to
be, but it was rumored to be vast, perhaps even
infinite. the chess pieces and the chessboard
themselves were in a secret tower. jaromir (in
the dream) was the firstborn son of one of the
contending families; the clocks chimed the hour
of the inescapable game; the dreamer was
running across the sand of a desert in the rain,
but he could recall neither the figures nor the
rules of chess. at that point, hladik awoke. the
din of the rain and the terrible clocks ceased. a
rhythmic and unanimous sound, punctuated by
the barking of orders, rose from the
zeltnergasse. it was sunrise, and the armored
vanguard of the third reich was rolling into
prague.
on the nineteenth, the authorities received a
report from an informer. that same day, toward 
dusk, jaromir hladik was arrested. he was led
to a white, aseptic jail on the opposite bank of
the moldau. he was unable to refute even one
of the gestapo's charges: his mother's family's
name was jaroslavski, he came of jewish blood,
his article on boehme dealt with a jewish
subject, his was one of the accusing signatures
appended to a protest against the anschluss. in
1928, he had translated the sefer yetsirah for
hermann barsdorf publishers; that company's
effusive catalog had exaggerated (as
commercial catalogs do) the translator's
renown; the catalog had been perused by capt.
julius rothe, one of the officers in whose hands
his fate now lay. there is no one who outside
his own area of knowledge is not credulous; two
or three adjectives in fraktur were enough to
persuade julius rothe of hladik's preeminence,
and therefore that he should be put to death—
pour encourager les autres. the date was set
for march 29, at 9:00a.m. that delay (whose
importance the reader will soon discover) was
caused by the administrative desire to work
impersonally and deliberately, as vegetables do, 
or planets.
hladik's first emotion was simple terror. he
reflected that he wouldn't have quailed at being
hanged, or decapitated, or having his throat slit,
but being shot by a firing squad was
unbearable. in vain he told himself a thousand
times that the pure and universal act of dying
was what ought to strike fear, not the concrete
circumstances of it, and yet hladik never
wearied of picturing to himself those
circumstances.
absurdly, he tried to foresee every variation.
he anticipated the process endlessly, from the
sleepless dawn to the mysterious discharge of
the rifles. long before the day that julius rothe
had set, hladik died hundreds of deaths—
standing in courtyards whose shapes and angles
ran the entire gamut of geometry, shot down by
soldiers of changing faces and varying numbers
who sometimes took aim at him from afar,
sometimes from quite near. he faced his
imaginary executions with true fear, perhaps
with true courage.
each enactment lasted several seconds; when 
the circle was closed, hladik would return,
unendingly, to the shivering eve of his death.
then it occurred to him that reality seldom
coincides with the way we envision it
beforehand; he inferred, with perverse logic,
that to foresee any particular detail is in fact to
prevent its happening. trusting in that frail
magic, he began to invent horrible details—so
that they would not occur; naturally he wound
up fearing that those details might be prophetic.
miserable in the night, he tried to buttress his
courage somehow on the fleeting stuff of time.
he knew that time was rushing toward the
morning of march 29; he reasoned aloud: it is
now the night of the twenty-second; so long as
this night and six more last i am invulnerable,
immortal. he mused that the nights he slept
were deep, dim cisterns into which he could
sink. sometimes, impatiently, he yearned for
the shots that would end his life once and for
all, the blast that would redeem him, for good
or ill, from his vain imaginings. on the twentyeighth,
as the last rays of the sun were
glimmering on the high bars of his window, he 
was diverted from those abject thoughts by the
image of his play, the enemies.
hladik was past forty. apart from a few
friends and many routines, the problematic
pursuit of literature constituted the whole of his
life; like every writer, he measured other men's
virtues by what they had accomplished, yet
asked that other men measure him by what he
planned someday to do. all the books he had
sent to the press left him with complex regret.
into his articles on the work of boehme, ibn
ezra, and fludd, he had poured mere diligence,
application; into his translation of the sefer
yetsirah, oversight, weariness, and conjecture.
he judged a vindication of eternity to be less
unsatisfactory, perhaps. the first volume
documents the diverse eternities that mankind
has invented, from parmenides' static being to
hinton's modifiable past; the second denies
(with francis bradley) that all the events of the
universe constitute a temporal series. it argues
that the number of humankind's possible
experiences is not infinite, and that a single
"repetition" is sufficient to prove that time is a
fallacy.... unfortunately, no less fallacious are
the arguments that prove that fallacy; hladik
was in the habit of ticking them off with a
certain disdainful perplexity. he had also
drafted a cycle of expressionist poems; these, to
the poet's confusion, appeared in a 1924
anthology and there was never a subsequent
anthology that didn't inherit them. with his
verse drama the enemies, hladik believed he
could redeem himself from all that equivocal
and languid past. (he admired verse in drama
because it does not allow the spectators to
forget unreality, which is a condition of art.)
this play observed the unities of time, place,
and action; it took place in hradcany, in the
library of baron römerstadt, on one of the last
evenings of the nineteenth century. in act i,
scene i, a stranger pays a visit to römerstadt.
(a clock strikes seven, a vehemence of last
sunlight exalts the window-panes, on a breeze
float the ecstatic notes of a familiar hungarian
melody.) this visit is followed by others; the
persons who come to importune römerstadt
are strangers to him, though he has the uneasy 
sense that he has seen them before, perhaps in
a dream. all fawn upon him, but it is clear—
first to the play's audience, then to the baron
himself—that they are secret enemies, sworn to
his destruction. römerstadt manages to check
or fend off their complex intrigues; in the
dialogue they allude to his fiancée, julia de
weidenau, and to one jaroslav kubin, who once
importuned her with his love. kubin has now
gone mad, and believes himself to be
römerstadt.... the dangers mount; by the end
of the second act, römerstadt finds himself
forced to kill one of the conspirators. then the
third and last act begins. little by little,
incoherences multiply; actors come back
onstage who had apparently been discarded
from the plot; for one instant, the man that
römerstadt killed returns. someone points out
that the hour has grown no later: the clock
strikes seven; upon the high windowpanes the
western sunlight shimmers; the thrilling
hungarian melody floats upon the air. the first
interlocutor comes onstage again and repeats
the same words he spoke in act i, scene i.
without the least surprise or astonishment,
römerstadt talks with him; the audience
realizes that römerstadt is the pitiable jaroslav
kubin. the play has not taken place; it is the
circular delirium that kubin endlessly
experiences and re-experiences.
hladik had never asked himself whether this
tragic-comedy of errors was banal or admirable,
carefully plotted or accidental. in the design i
have outlined here, he had intuitively hit upon
the best way of hiding his short-comings and
giving full play to his strengths, the possibility
of rescuing (albeit symbolically) that which was
fundamental to his life. he had finished the first
act and one or another scene of the third; the
metrical nature of the play allowed him to go
over it continually, correcting the hexameters,
without a manuscript. it occurred to him that
he still had two acts to go, yet very soon he was
to die. in the darkness he spoke with god. if,
he prayed, i do somehow exist, if i am not one
of thy repetitions or errata, then i exist as the
author of the enemies. in order to complete
that play, which can justify me and justify thee 
as well, i need one more year. grant me those
days, thou who art the centuries and time
itself. it was the last night, the most monstrous
night, but ten minutes later sleep flooded
hladik like some dark ocean.
toward dawn, he dreamed that he was in
hiding, in one of the naves of the clementine
library. what are you looking for? a librarian
wearing dark glasses asked him. i'm looking for
god, hladik replied.
god, the librarian said, is in one of the
letters on one of the pages of one of the four
hundred thousand volumes in the clementine.
my parents and my parents' parents searched
for that letter; i myself have gone blind
searching for it. he removed his spectacles and
hladik saw his eyes, which were dead. a reader
came in to return an atlas. this atlas is
worthless, he said, and handed it to hladik.
hladik opened it at random. he saw a map of
india—a dizzying page. suddenly certain, he
touched one of the tiny letters. a voice that was
everywhere spoke to him: the time for your
labor has been granted. here hladik awoke. 
he remembered that the dreams of men
belong to god and that maimonides had written
that the words of a dream, when they are clear
and distinct and one cannot see who spoke
them, are holy. hladik put his clothes on; two
soldiers entered the cell and ordered him to
follow them.
from inside his cell, hladik had thought that
when he emerged he would see a maze of
galleries, stairways, and wings. reality was not
so rich; he and the soldiers made their way
down a single iron staircase into a rearyard.
several soldiers—some with their uniforms
unbuttoned—were looking over a motorcycle,
arguing about it. the sergeant looked at his
watch; it was eight forty-four. they had to wait
until nine. hladik, feeling more insignificant
than ill fortuned, sat down on a pile of firewood.
he noticed that the soldiers' eyes avoided his
own. to make the wait easier, the sergeant
handed him a cigarette.
hladik did not smoke; he accepted the
cigarette out of courtesy, or out of humility.
when he lighted it, he saw that his hands were 
trembling. the day clouded over; the soldiers
were speaking in low voices, as though he were
already dead. vainly he tried to recall the
woman that julia de weidenau had
symbolized....
the firing squad fell in, lined up straight.
hladik, standing against the prison wall,
awaited the discharge.
someone was afraid the wall would be
spattered with blood; the prisoner was ordered
to come forward a few steps. absurdly, hladik
was reminded of the preliminary shufflingsabout
of photographers. a heavy drop of rain
grazed hladik's temple and rolled slowly down
his cheek; the sergeant called out the final
order.
the physical universe stopped.
the weapons converged upon hladik, but the
men who were to kill him were immobile. the
sergeant's arm seemed to freeze, eternal, in an
inconclusive gesture. on one of the paving
stones of the yard, a bee cast a motionless
shadow. as though in a painting, the wind had
died. hladik attempted a scream, a syllable, the 
twisting of a hand. he realized that he was
paralyzed. he could hear not the slightest
murmur of the halted world. i am in hell, he
thought, i am dead. then i am mad, he
thought. and then, time has halted. then he
reflected that if that were true, his thoughts
would have halted as well. he tried to test this
conjecture: he repeated (without moving his
lips) virgil's mysterious fourth eclogue. he
imagined that the now-remote soldiers must be
as disturbed by this as he was; he wished he
could communicate with them. he was
surprised and puzzled to feel neither the
slightest weariness nor any faintness from his
long immobility. after an indeterminate time,
he slept. when he awoke, the world was still
motionless and muffled. the drop of water still
hung on his cheek; on the yard, there still hung
the shadow of the bee; in the air the smoke
from the cigarette he'd smoked had never
wafted away. another of those "days" passed
before hladik understood.
he had asked god for an entire year in which
to finish his work; god in his omnipotence had 
granted him a year. god had performed for him
a secret miracle: the german bullet would kill
him, at the determined hour, but in hladik's
mind a year would pass between the order to
fire and the discharge of the rifles. from
perplexity hladik moved to stupor, from stupor
to resignation, from resignation to sudden
gratitude.
he had no document but his memory; the
fact that he had to learn each hexameter as he
added it imposed upon him a providential
strictness, unsuspected by those who essay and
then forget vague provisional paragraphs. he
did not work for posterity, nor did he work for
god, whose literary preferences were largely
unknown to him. painstakingly, motionlessly,
secretly, he forged in time his grand invisible
labyrinth. he re-did the third act twice. he
struck out one and another overly obvious
symbol—the repeated chimings of the clock, the
music. no detail was irksome to him. he cut,
condensed, expanded; in some cases he decided
the original version should stand. he came to
love the courtyard, the prison; one of the faces 
that stood before him altered his conception of
romerstadt's character. he discovered that the
hard-won cacophonies that were so alarming to
flaubert are mere visual superstitions—
weaknesses and irritations of the written, not
the sounded, word.... he completed his play;
only a single epithet was left to be decided upon
now. he found it; the drop of water rolled down
his cheek.
he began a maddened cry, he shook his
head, and the fourfold volley felled him.
jaromir hladik died on the twenty-ninth of
march, at 9:02a.m.
three versions of judas
there seemed a certainty in degradation.
t. e. lawrence,
the seven pillars of wisdom, ciii
in asia minor or in alexandria, in the second
century of our faith, in the days when basilides 
proclaimed that the cosmos was a reckless or
maleficent improvisation by angels lacking in
perfection, nils runeberg ,with singular
intellectual passion, would have led one of the
gnostic conventicles. dante might have
consigned him to a sepulcher of fire; his name
would have helped swell the catalogs of minor
heresiarchs, between satornilus and
carpocrates; one or another fragment of his
teachings, bedizened with invective, would have
been recorded for posterity in the apocryphal
liber adversus omnes haereses or would have
perished when the burning of a monastery's
library devoured the last copy of the syntagma.
instead, god allotted him the twentieth century
and the university city of lund. there, in 1904,
he published the first edition of kristus och
judas; there, in 1909, his magnum opus, den
hemlige walsaren. (of this last-named book
there is a german version, translated in 1912 by
emil schering; it is titled der heimliche
heiland.)
before undertaking an examination of the
works mentioned above, it is important to
reiterate that nils runeberg, a member of the
national evangelical union, was a deeply
religious man. at a soirée in paris or even in
buenos aires, a man of letters might very well
rediscover runeberg's theses; those theses,
proposed at such a soirée, would be slight and
pointless exercises in slovenliness or
blasphemy.
for runeberg, they were the key that
unlocked one of theology's central mysteries;
they were the stuff of study and meditation, of
historical and philological controversy, of
arrogance, of exultation, and of terror.
they justified and destroyed his life. those
who peruse this article should likewise consider
that it records only runeberg's conclusions, not
his dialectic or his proofs. it will be said that the
conclusion no doubt preceded its "proofs." but
what man can content himself with seeking out
proofs for a thing that not even he himself
believes in, or whose teaching he cares naught
for?
the first edition of kristus och judas bears
this categorical epigraph, whose meaning, years 
afterward, nils runeberg himself was
monstrously to expatiate upon: it is not one
thing, but all the things which legend attributes
to judas iscariot that are false (de
quincey,1857). like a certain german before
him, dequincey speculated that judas had
delivered up christ in order to force him to
declare his divinity and set in motion a vast
uprising against rome's yoke; runeberg
suggests a vindication of a metaphysical nature.
cleverly, he begins by emphasizing how
superfluous judas' action was. he observes (as
robertson had) that in order to identify a
teacher who preached every day in the
synagogue and worked miracles in the plain
sight of thousands of people, there was no need
of betrayal by one of the teacher's own apostles.
that is precisely, however, what occurred. to
assume an error in the scriptures is intolerable,
but it is no less intolerable to assume that a
random act intruded into the most precious
event in the history of the world. ergo, judas'
betrayal was not a random act, but
predetermined, with its own mysterious place
in the economy of redemption. runeberg
continues: the word, when it was made flesh,
passed from omnipresence into space, from
eternity into history, from unlimited joy and
happiness into mutability and death; to repay
that sacrifice, it was needful that a man (in
representation of all mankind) make a sacrifice
of equal worth. judas iscariot was that man.
alone among the apostles, judas sensed jesus'
secret divinity and his terrible purpose. the
word had stooped to become mortal; judas, a
disciple of the word, would stoop to become an
informer (the most heinous crime that infamy
will bear) and to dwell amid inextinguishable
flames. as below, so above; the forms of earth
correspond to the forms of heaven; the blotches
of the skin are a map of the incorruptible
constellations; judas is somehow a reflection of
jesus. from that conclusion derive the thirty
pieces of silver and the kiss; from that
conclusion derives the voluntary death, so as
even more emphatically to merit reprobation.
thus did nils runeberg explain the enigma that
is judas. 
theologians of every faith brought forth
refutations. lars peter engström accused
runeberg of ignoring the hypostatic union; axel
borelius, of rekindling the docetic heresy,
which denied jesus' humanity; the steely
bishop of lund accused him of contradicting
chapter 22, verse 3 of the gospel according to
st. luke.
these diverse anathemas did have their
influence on runeberg, who partially re-wrote
the reprehended book and modified its
doctrine. he abandoned the theological ground
to his adversaries and proposed oblique
arguments of a moral order. he admitted that
jesus, "who could call upon the considerable
resources that omnipotence can offer," had no
need of a man to carry out his plan for the
redemption of all mankind. then he rebutted
those who claimed that we know nothing of the
inexplicable betrayer. we know, runeberg said,
that he was one of the apostles, one of those
chosen to herald the kingdom of heaven, to heal
the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, and
cast out demons (matthew 10:7-8, luke 9:1).
the acts of a man thus singled out by the
redeemer merit the most sympathetic
interpretation we can give them. to impute his
crime to greed (as some have done, citing john
12:6) is to settle for the basest motive. nils
runeberg proposed a motive at the opposite
extreme: a hyperbolic, even limitless asceticism.
the ascetic, ad majorem dei gloriam, debases
and mortifies the flesh; judas debased and
mortified the spirit. he renounced honor,
goodness, peace, the kingdom of heaven, as
others, less heroically, renounce pleasure.1
[
1 borelius sarcastically asks: why did he not
renounce renunciation? why not renounce the
renunciation of renunciation?]
he plotted his sins with terrible lucidity. in
adultery, tenderness and abnegation often play
a role; in homicide, courage; in blasphemy and
profanation, a certain satanic zeal. judas chose
sins unvisited by any virtue: abuse of
confidence (john 12:6) and betrayal. he
labored with titanic humility; he believed
himself unworthy of being good. paul wrote: he
that glorieth, let him glory in the lord (i
corinthians 1:31); judas sought hell because joy
in the lord was enough for him. he thought
that happiness, like goodness, is a divine
attribute, which should not be usurped by
men.2
[
2 in a book unknown to runeberg, euclides
da cunha “notes that in the view of the canudos
heresiarch antonio conselheiro, “virtue is a
near impiety." the argentine reader will recall
analogous passages in the work of the poet
almafuerte.]
in the symbolist journal sju insegel,
runeberg published an assiduous descriptive
poem titled "the secret lake"; the first verses
narrate the events of a tumultuous day, while
the last record the discovery of a glacial "tarn."
the poet suggests that the eternity of those
silent waters puts right our useless violence
and—somehow—both allows it and absolves it.
the poem ends with these words: "the water of
the forest is happy; we can be evil and in pain."
many have discovered, after the fact, that in
runeberg's justifiable beginnings lies his
extravagant end, and that den hemlige
valsaren is a mere perversion or exasperation
of his kristus och judas. in late 1907,
runeberg completed and revised the
manuscript text; almost two years passed before
he delivered it to the publisher. in october,
1909, the book appeared with a foreword
(lukewarm to the point of being enigmatic) by
the danish hebrew scholar erik erfjord, and
with the following epigraph: he was in the
world, and the world was made by him, and
the world knew him not (john 1:10). the book's
general argument is not complex, although its
conclusion is monstrous. god, argues nils
runeberg, stooped to become man for the
redemption of the human race; we might well
then presume that the sacrifice effected by him
was perfect, not invalidated or attenuated by
omissions. to limit his suffering to the agony of
one afternoon on the cross is blasphemous.3
[
3maurice abramowicz observes: "jésus,
d'après ce scandinave, a toujours le beau rôle;
ses déboires, grâce à la science des typographes,
jouissent d'une réputation polyglotte; sa
résidence de trente-trois ans parmi les humains 
ne fut, en somme, qu'une villégiature."]
in appendix iii to his christelige dogmatik,
erfjord rebuts this passage. he notes that the
crucifixion of god has not ended, because that
which happened once in time is repeated
endlessly in eternity. judas, now, continues to
hold out his hand for the silver, continues to
kiss jesus' cheek, continues to scatter the pieces
of silver in the temple, continues to knot the
noose on the field of blood. (in order to justify
this statement, erfjord cites the last chapter of
the first volume of jaromir hladik's vindication
of eternity.) to claim that he was man, and yet
was incapable of sin, is to fall into
contradiction; the attributes impeccabilitas and
humanitas are incompatible. kemnitz will allow
that the redeemer could feel weariness, cold,
distress, hunger, and thirst; one might also
allow him to be able to sin and be condemned
to damnation. for many, the famous words in
isaiah 53: 2-3, he shall grow up before him as
a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry
ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and
when we shall see him, there is no beauty that 
we should desire him. he is despised and
rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief, are a foreshadowing of
the crucified christ at the hour of his death.
for some (hans lassen martensen, for
example), they are a refutation of the loveliness
that the vulgar consensus attributes to christ;
for runeberg, they are the detailed prophecy
not of a moment but of the entire horrendous
future, in time and in eternity, of the word
made flesh. god was made totally man, but
man to the point of iniquity, man to the point of
reprobation and the abyss. in order to save us,
he could have chosen any of the lives that
weave the confused web of history: he could
have been alexander or pythagoras or rurik or
jesus; he chose an abject existence: he was
judas.
in vain did the bookstores of stockholm and
lund offer readers this revelation. the
incredulous considered it, a priori, a vapid and
tedious theological game; theologians disdained
it. runeberg sensed in that ecumenical
indifference an almost miraculous
confirmation. god had ordered that
indifference; god did not want his terrible
secret spread throughout the earth. runeberg
realized that the hour was not yet come. he felt
that ancient, divine curses were met in him. he
recalled elijah and moses, who covered their
faces upon the mountain so as not to look upon
god; isaiah, who was terrified when his eyes
beheld the one whose glory fills the earth; saul,
whose eyes were blinded on the road to
damascus; the rabbi simeon ben azai, who saw
the garden and died; the famous wizard john
of viterbo, who went mad when the trinity was
revealed to him; the midrashim, who
abominate those who speak the shem ham
ephorash, the secret name of god. was it not
that dark sin that he, runeberg, was guilty of?
might not that be the blasphemy against the
holy ghost (matthew 12:31) which shall not be
forgiven? valerius soranus died for revealing
the hidden name of rome; what infinite
punishment would be runeberg's for having
discovered and revealed the terrible name of
god? 
drunk with sleeplessness and his dizzying
dialectic, nils runeberg wandered the streets of
mälmo, crying out for a blessing—that he be
allowed to share the inferno with the
redeemer.
he died of a ruptured aneurysm on march ï,
1912. heresiologists will perhaps remember
him; he added to the concept of the son, which
might have been thought long spent, the
complexities of misery and evil.
1944
the end
lying on his back, recabarren opened his
eyes a bit and saw the sloping ceiling of thick
cane. from the other room there came the
strumming of a guitar, like some
inconsequential labyrinth, infinitely tangling
and untangling.... little by little, reality came
back to him, the ordinary things that now would
always be just these ordinary things. he looked 
down without pity at his great useless body, the
plain wool poncho that wrapped his legs.
outside, beyond the thick bars at his window,
spread the flatland and the evening; he had
slept, but the sky was still filled with light. he
groped with his left arm until he found the
brass cowbell that hung at the foot of the cot.
he shook it once or twice; outside his door, the
unassuming chords continued.
the guitar was being played by a black man
who had shown up one night flattering himself
that he was a singer; he had challenged another
stranger to a song contest, the way traveling
singers did. beaten, he went on showing up at
the general-store-and-bar night after night, as
though he were waiting for someone. he spent
hours with the guitar, but he never sang again;
it could be that the defeat had turned him
bitter. people had grown used to the inoffensive
man. recabarren, the owner of the bar, would
never forget that contest; the next day, as he
was trying to straighten some bales of yerba,
his right side had suddenly gone dead on him,
and he discovered that he couldn't talk. from
learning to pity the misfortunes of the heroes of
our novels, we wind up feeling too much pity for
our own; but not recabarren, who accepted his
paralysis as he had earlier accepted the severity
and the solitudes of the americas. a man in the
habit of living in the present, as animals do, he
now looked up at the sky and reflected that the
red ring around the moon was a sign of rain.
a boy with indian-like features (recabarren's
son, perhaps) opened the door a crack.
recabarren asked him with his eyes whether
anybody was around; the boy, not one to talk
much, made a motion with his hand to say there
wasn't—the black man didn't count. then the
prostrate man was left alone; his left hand
played awhile with the bell, as though
exercising some power.
the plains, in the last rays of the sun, were
almost abstract, as though seen in a dream. a
dot wavered on the horizon, then grew until it
became a horseman riding, or so it seemed,
toward the house.
recabarren could make out the broadbrimmed
hat, the dark poncho, the piebald
horse, but not the face of the rider, who finally
reined in the horse and came toward the house
at an easy trot. some two hundred yards out, he
veered off to the side. at that, the man was out
of recabarren's line of sight, but recabarren
heard him speak, get down off his horse, tie it to
the post, and with a firm step enter the bar.
without raising his eyes from the guitar,
where he seemed to be looking for something,
the black man spoke. "i knew i could count on
you, sir," he softly said.
"and i knew i could count on you, old
nigger," the other man replied, his voice harsh.
"a heap of days i've made you wait, but here i
am."
there was a silence. then the black man
spoke again. "i'm getting used to waiting. i've
been waiting now for seven years."
unhurried, the other man explained:
"it'd been longer than seven years that i'd
gone without seeing my children. i found them
that day, and i wouldn't have it so's i looked to
them like a man on his way to a knife fight."*
"i understood that," the black man said. "i
hope they were all in good health."
the stranger, who had sat down at the bar,
gave a hearty laugh at that. he ordered a drink
and took a sip or two, but didn't finish it.
"i gave them some advice," he said, "which is
something you can never get too much of and
doesn't cost a lot. i told them, among other
things, that a man ought not to go spilling
another man's blood."
a slow chord preceded the black man's
response: "good advice, too. that way they
won't grow up to be like us."
"not like me, anyway," said the stranger, who
then added, as though thinking out loud: "fate
would have it that i kill, and now it's put a knife
in my hand again."
"fall's coming on," the black man observed,
as though he hadn't heard, "and the days are
getting shorter."
"the light that's left will be enough for me,"
replied the other man, getting to his feet.
he stood square before the black man and in
a tired voice said to him, "leave that guitar
alone, now—you've got another kind of contest 
to try to win today."
the two men walked toward the door. as the
black man stepped outside, he murmured,
"could be this one goes as bad f'r me as the
other one did."
"it's not that the first one went bad for you,"
the other man answered, serious. "it's that you
couldn't hardly wait to get to the second one."
they walked beside each other until they got
some distance from the houses. one place on
the plains was much like another, and the moon
was bright. suddenly they looked at each other,
stopped, and the stranger took off his spurs.
they already had their ponchos wrapped
around their forearms when the black man
spoke.
"one thing i want to ask you before we get
down to it. i want you to put all your courage
and all your skill into this, like you did seven
years ago when you killed my brother."
for perhaps the first time in their exchange,
martín fierro heard the hatred. his blood felt
it, like a sharp prod. they circled, clashed, and
sharp steel marked the black man's face. 
there is an hour just at evening when the
plains seem on the verge of saying something;
they never do, or perhaps they do—eternally—
though we don't understand it, or perhaps we
do understand but what they say is as
untranslatable as music.... from his cot,
recabarren saw the end. a thrust, and the black
man dodged back, lost his footing, feigned a
slash to his opponent's face, and then lunged
out with a deep jab that buried the knife in his
belly. then came another thrust, which the
storekeeper couldn't see, and fierro did not get
up. unmoving, the black man seemed to stand
watch over the agonizing death. he wiped off
the bloody knife in the grass and walked slowly
back toward the houses, never looking back.
his work of vengeance done, he was nobody
now. or rather, he was the other one: there was
neither destination nor destiny on earth for
him, and he had killed a man. 
the cult of the phoenix
those who write that the cult of the phoenix
had its origin in heliopolis, and claim that it
derives from the religious restoration that
followed the death of the reformer amenhotep
iv, cite the writings of herodotus and tacitus
and the inscriptions on egyptian monuments,
but they are unaware, perhaps willfully
unaware, that the cult's designation as "the cult
of the phoenix" can be traced back no farther
than to hrabanus maurus and that the earliest
sources (the saturnalia, say, or flavius
josephus) speak only of "the people of the
practice" or "the people of the secret." in the
conventicles of ferrara, gregorovius observed
that mention of the phoenix was very rare in the
spoken language; in geneva, i have had
conversations with artisans who did not
understand me when i asked whether they were
men of the phoenix but immediately admitted
to being men of the secret. unless i am
mistaken, much the same might be said about
buddhists: the name by which the world knows 
them is not the name that they themselves
pronounce.
on one altogether too famous page,
moklosich has equated the members of the cult
of the phoenix with the gypsies. in chile and in
hungary, there are both gypsies and members
of the sect; apart from their ubiquity, the two
groups have very little in common. gypsies are
horse traders, pot-makers, blacksmiths, and
fortune-tellers; the members of the cult of the
phoenix are generally contented practitioners of
the "liberal professions." gypsies are of a
certain physical type, and speak, or used to
speak, a secret language; the members of the
cult are indistinguishable from other men, and
the proof of this is that they have never been
persecuted. gypsies are picturesque, and often
inspire bad poets; ballads, photographs, and
boleros fail to mention the members of the
cult.... martin buber says that jews are
essentially sufferers; not all the members of the
cult are, and some actively abhor pathos. that
public and well-known truth suffices to refute
the vulgar error (absurdly defended by
urmann) which sees the roots of the phoenix as
lying in israel. people's reasoning goes more or
less this way: urmann was a sensitive man;
urmann was a jew; urmann made a habit of
visiting the members of the cult in the jewish
ghettos of prague; the affinity that urmann
sensed proves a real relationship. in all honesty,
i cannot concur with that conclusion. that the
members of the cult should, in a jewish milieu,
resemble jews proves nothing; what cannot be
denied is that they, like hazlitt's infinite
shakespeare, resemble every man in the world.
they are all things to all men, like the apostle; a
few days ago, dr. juan francisco amaro, of
paysandú, pondered the ease with which they
assimilate, the ease with which they
"naturalize" themselves.
i have said that the history of the cult records
no persecutions. that is true, but since there is
no group of human beings that does not include
adherents of the sect of the phoenix, it is also
true that there has been no persecution or
severity that the members of the cult have not
suffered and carried out. in the wars of the
western world and in the distant wars of asia,
their blood has been spilled for centuries, under
enemy flags; it is hardly worth their while to
identify themselves with every nation on the
globe.
lacking a sacred book to unite them as the
scriptures unite israel, lacking a common
memory, lacking that other memory that is a
common language, scattered across the face of
the earth, diverse in color and in feature, there
is but one thing—the secret—that unites them,
and that will unite them until the end of time.
once, in addition to the secret there was a
legend (and perhaps a cosmogonie myth), but
the superficial men of the phoenix have
forgotten it, and today all that is left to them is
the dim and obscure story of a punishment. a
punishment, or a pact, or a privilege—versions
differ; but what one may dimly see in all of
them is the judgment of a god who promises
eternity to a race of beings if its men,
generation upon generation, perform a certain
ritual. i have compared travelers' reports, i have
spoken with patriarchs and theologians; i can
attest that the performance of that ritual is the
only religious practice observed by the
members of the cult. the ritual is, in fact, the
secret. the secret, as i have said, is transmitted
from generation to generation, but tradition
forbids a mother from teaching it to her
children, as it forbids priests from doing so;
initiation into the mystery is the task of the
lowest individuals of the group. a slave, a leper,
or a beggar plays the role of mystagogue. a
child, too, may catechize another child. the act
itself is trivial, the matter of a moment's time,
and it needs no description. the materials used
are cork, wax, or gum arabic. (in the liturgy
there is mention of "slime"; pond slime is often
used as well.) there are no temples dedicated
expressly to the cult's worship, but ruins,
cellars, or entryways are considered appropriate
sites. the secret is sacred, but that does not
prevent its being a bit ridiculous; the
performance of it is furtive, even clandestine,
and its adepts do not speak of it. there are no
decent words by which to call it, but it is
understood that all words somehow name it, or 
rather, that they inevitably allude to it—and so i
have said some insignificant thing in
conversation and have seen adepts smile or
grow uncomfortable because they sensed i had
touched upon the secret. in germanic
literatures there are poems written by members
of the cult whose nominal subject is the sea or
twilight; more than once i have heard people
say that these poems are, somehow, symbols of
the secret. orbis terrarium est speculum ludi,
goes an apocryphal saying reported by du
gange in his glossary. a kind of sacred horror
keeps some of the faithful from performing that
simplest of rituals; they are despised by the
other members of the sect, but they despise
themselves even more. those, on the other
hand, who deliberately renounce the practice
and achieve direct commerce with the deity
command great respect; such men speak of that
commerce using figures from the liturgy, and so
we find that john of the rood wrote as follows:
let the nine firmaments be told
that god is delightful as the cork and mire. 
on three continents i have merited the
friendship of many worshipers of the phoenix; i
know that the secret at first struck them as
banal, shameful, vulgar, and (stranger still)
unbelievable. they could not bring themselves
to admit that their parents had ever stooped to
such acts. it is odd that the secret did not die
out long ago; but in spite of the world's
vicissitudes, in spite of wars and exoduses, it
does, in its full awesomeness, come to all the
faithful. someone has even dared to claim that
by now it is instinctive.
the south
the man that stepped off the boat in buenos
aires in 1871 was a minister of the evangelical
church; his name was johannes dahlmann. by
1939, one of his grandsons, juan dahlmann,
was secretary of a municipal library on calle
córdoba and considered himself profoundly
argentine. his maternal grandfather had been
francisco flores, of the 2nd infantry of the
line, who died on the border of buenos aires
“from a spear wielded by the indians under
catriel.” in the contrary pulls from his two
lineages, juan dahlmann (perhaps impelled by
his germanic blood) chose that of his romantic
ancestor, or that of a romantic death. that
slightly willful but never ostentatious
"argentinization" drew sustenance from an old
sword, a locket containing the daguerreotype of
a bearded, inexpressive man, the joy and
courage of certain melodies, the habit of certain
verses in martín fierro, the passing years, a
certain lack of spiritedness, and solitude. at the
price of some self-denial, dahlmann had
managed to save the shell of a large country
house in the south that had once belonged to
the flores family; one of the touchstones of his
memory was the image of the eucalyptus trees
and the long pink-colored house that had once
been scarlet. his work, and perhaps his
indolence, held him in the city. summer after
summer he contented himself with the abstract 
idea of possession and with the certainty that
his house was waiting for him, at a precise place
on the flatlands. in late february, 1939,
something happened to him.
though blind to guilt, fate can be merciless
with the slightest distractions. that afternoon
dahlmann had come upon a copy (from which
some pages were missing) of weil's arabian
nights; eager to examine his find, he did not
wait for the elevator—he hurriedly took the
stairs. something in the dimness brushed his
forehead—a bat? a bird? on the face of the
woman who opened the door to him, he saw an
expression of horror, and the hand he passed
over his forehead came back red with blood. his
brow had caught the edge of a recently painted
casement window that somebody had forgotten
to close.
dahlmann managed to sleep, but by the early
hours of morning he was awake, and from that
time on, the flavor of all things was monstrous
to him. fever wore him away, and illustrations
from the arabian nights began to illuminate
nightmares. friends and members of his family 
would visit him and with exaggerated smiles tell
him how well he looked. dahlmann, in a kind of
feeble stupor, would hear their words, and it
would amaze him that they couldn't see he was
in hell. eight days passed, like eight hundred
years. one afternoon, his usual physician
appeared with a new man, and they drove
dahlmann to a sanatorium on calle ecuador;
he needed to have an x-ray. sitting in the cab
they had hired to drive them, dahlmann
reflected that he might, at last, in a room that
was not his own, be able to sleep. he felt happy,
he felt like talking, but the moment they
arrived, his clothes were stripped from him, his
head was shaved, he was strapped with metal
bands to a table, he was blinded and dizzied
with bright lights, his heart and lungs were
listened to, and a man in a surgical mask stuck
a needle in his arm. he awoke nauseated,
bandaged, in a cell much like the bottom of a
well, and in the days and nights that followed,
he realized that until then he had been only
somewhere on the outskirts of hell. ice left but
the slightest trace of coolness in his mouth.
during these days, dahlmann hated every inch
of himself; he hated his identity, his bodily
needs, his humiliation, the beard that prickled
his face. he stoically suffered the treatments
administered to him, which were quite painful,
but when the surgeon told him he'd been on the
verge of death from septicemia, dahlmann,
suddenly self-pitying, broke down and cried.
the physical miseries, the unending
anticipation of bad nights had not allowed him
to think about anything as abstract as death.
the next day, the surgeon told him he was
coming right along, and that he'd soon be able
to go out to the country house to convalesce.
incredibly, the promised day arrived.
reality is partial to symmetries and slight
anachronisms; dahlmann had come to the
sanatorium in a cab, and it was a cab that took
him to the station at plaza constitución. the
first cool breath of autumn, after the oppression
of the summer, was like a natural symbol of his
life brought back from fever and the brink of
death. the city, at that seven o'clock in the
morning, had not lost that look of a ramshackle 
old house that cities take on at night; the streets
were like long porches and corridors, the plazas
like interior courtyards. after his long stay in
hospital, dahlmann took it all in with delight
and a touch of vertigo; a few seconds before his
eyes registered them, he would recall the
corners, the marquees, the modest variety of
buenos aires. in the yellow light of the new day,
it all came back to him.
everyone knows that the south begins on the
other side of avenida rivadavia. dahlmann had
often said that that was no mere saying, that by
crossing rivadavia one entered an older and
more stable world.
from the cab, he sought among the new
buildings the window barred with wrought iron,
the door knocker, the arch of a doorway, the
long entryway, the almost-secret courtyard.
in the grand hall of the station he saw that he
had thirty minutes before his train left. he
suddenly remembered that there was a café on
calle brasil (a few yards from yrigoyen's house)
where there was a huge cat that would let
people pet it, like some disdainful deity. he
went in. there was the cat, asleep.
he ordered a cup of coffee, slowly spooned
sugar into it, tasted it (a pleasure that had been
forbidden him in the clinic), and thought, while
he stroked the cat's black fur, that this contact
was illusory, that he and the cat were separated
as though by a pane of glass, because man lives
in time, in successiveness, while the magical
animal lives in the present, in the eternity of the
instant.
the train, stretching along the next-to-last
platform, was waiting. dahlmann walked
through the cars until he came to one that was
almost empty. he lifted his bag onto the
luggage rack; when the train pulled out, he
opened his bag and after a slight hesitation took
from it the first volume of the arabian nights.
to travel with this book so closely linked to the
history of his torment was an affirmation that
the torment was past, and was a joyous, secret
challenge to the frustrated forces of evil.
on both sides of the train, the city unraveled
into suburbs; that sight, and later the sight of
lawns and large country homes, led dahlmann
to put aside his reading. the truth is, dahlmann
read very little; the lodestone mountain and the
genie sworn to kill the man who released him
from the bottle were, as anyone will admit,
wondrous things, but not much more wondrous
than this morning and the fact of being.
happiness distracted him from scheherazade
and her superfluous miracles; dahlmann closed
the book and allowed himself simply to live.
lunch (with bouillon served in bowls of
shining metal, as in the now-distant summers
of his childhood) was another quiet, savored
pleasure.
tomorrow i will wake up at my ranch, he
thought, and it was as though he were two men
at once: the man gliding along through the
autumn day and the geography of his native
land, and the other man, imprisoned in a
sanatorium and subjected to methodical
attentions. he saw unplastered brick houses,
long and angular, infinitely watching the trains
go by; he saw horsemen on the clod-strewn
roads; he saw ditches and lakes and pastures;
he saw long glowing clouds that seemed made 
of marble, and all these things were fortuitous,
like some dream of the flat prairies. he also
thought he recognized trees and crops that he
couldn't have told one the name of— his direct
knowledge of the country was considerably
inferior to his nostalgic, literary knowledge.
from time to time he nodded off, and in his
dreams there was the rushing momentum of the
train. now the unbearable white sun of midday
was the yellow sun that comes before nightfall
and that soon would turn to red. the car was
different now, too; it was not the same car that
had pulled out of the station in buenos aires—
the plains and the hours had penetrated and
transfigured it. outside, the moving shadow of
the train stretched out toward the horizon. the
elemental earth was not disturbed by
settlements or any other signs of humanity. all
was vast, but at the same time intimate and
somehow secret. in all the immense
countryside, there would sometimes be nothing
but a bull. the solitude was perfect, if perhaps
hostile, and dahlmann almost suspected that he
was traveling not only into the south but into 
the past.
from that fantastic conjecture he was
distracted by the conductor, who seeing
dahlmann's ticket informed him that the train
would not be leaving him at the usual station,
but at a different one, a little before it, that
dahlmann barely knew. (the man added an
explanation that dahlmann didn't try to
understand, didn't even listen to, because the
mechanics of it didn't matter.)
the train came to its laborious halt in
virtually the middle of the countryside. the
station sat on the other side of the tracks, and
was hardly more than a covered platform. they
had no vehicle there, but the station-master
figured dahlmann might be able to find one at a
store he directed him to—ten or twelve blocks
away.
dahlmann accepted the walk as a small
adventure. the sun had sunk below the horizon
now, but one final splendor brought a glory to
the living yet silent plains before they were
blotted out by night. less to keep from tiring
himself than to make those things last,
dahlmann walked slowly, inhaling with grave
happiness the smell of clover.
the store had once been bright red, but the
years had tempered its violent color (to its
advantage).
there was something in its sorry architecture
that reminded dahlmann of a steel engraving,
perhaps from an old edition of paulet virginie.
there were several horses tied to the rail in
front. inside, dahlmann thought he recognized
the owner; then he realized that he'd been
fooled by the man's resemblance to one of the
employees at the sanatorium. when the man
heard dahlmann's story, he said he'd have the
calash harnessed up; to add yet another event
to that day, and to pass the time, dahlmann
decided to eat there in the country store.
at one table some rough-looking young men
were noisily eating and drinking; at first
dahlmann didn't pay much attention. on the
floor, curled against the bar, lay an old man, as
motionless as an object. the many years had
worn him away and polished him, as a stone is
worn smooth by running water or a saying is 
polished by generations of humankind. he was
small, dark, and dried up, and he seemed to be
outside time, in a sort of eternity. dahlmann
was warmed by the tightness of the man's
hairband, the baize poncho he wore, his gaucho
trousers, and the boots made out of the skin of a
horse's leg, and he said to himself, recalling
futile arguments with people from districts in
the north, or from entre ríos, that only in the
south did gauchos like that exist anymore.
dahlmann made himself comfortable near
the window. little by little, darkness was
enveloping the countryside, but the smells and
sounds of the plains still floated in through the
thick iron grate at the window. the store-keeper
brought him sardines and then roast meat;
dahlmann washed them down with more than
one glass of red wine. idly, he savored the harsh
bouquet of the wine and let his gaze wander
over the store, which by now had turned a little
sleepy. the kerosene lantern hung from one of
the beams. there were three customers at the
other table: two looked like laborers; the other,
with coarse, indian-like features, sat drinking
with his wide-brimmed hat on. dahlmann
suddenly felt something lightly brush his face.
next to the tumbler of cloudy glass, on one of
the stripes in the tablecloth, lay a little ball of
wadded bread. that was all, but somebody had
thrown it at him.
the drinkers at the other table seemed
unaware of his presence. dahlmann, puzzled,
decided that nothing had happened, and he
opened the volume of the arabian nights, as
though to block out reality.
another wad of bread hit him a few minutes
later, and this time the laborers laughed.
dahlmann told himself he wasn't scared, but
that it would be madness for him, a sick man, to
be dragged by strangers into some chaotic bar
fight. he made up his mind to leave; he was
already on his feet when the storekeeper came
over and urged him, his voice alarmed: "sr.
dahlmann, ignore those boys over there—
they're just feeling their oats."
dahlmann did not find it strange that the
storekeeper should know his name by now but
he sensed that the man's conciliatory words
actually made the situation worse. before, the
men's provocation had been directed at an
accidental face, almost at nobody; now it was
aimed at him, at his name, and the men at the
other table would know that name. dahlmann
brushed the storekeeper aside, faced the
laborers, and asked them what their problem
was.
the young thug with the indian-looking face
stood up, stumbling as he did so. at one pace
from dahlmann, he shouted insults at him, as
though he were far away. he was playacting,
exaggerating his drunkenness, and the
exaggeration produced an impression both
fierce and mocking. amid curses and
obscenities, the man threw a long knife into the
air, followed it with his eyes, caught it, and
challenged dahlmann to fight. the
storekeeper's voice shook as he objected that
dahlmann was unarmed. at that point,
something unforeseeable happened.
from out of a corner, the motionless old
gaucho in whom dahlmann had seen a symbol
of the south (the south that belonged to him) 
tossed him a naked dagger—it came to rest at
dahlmann's feet. it was as though the south
itself had decided that dahlmann should accept
the challenge. dahlmann bent to pick up the
dagger, and as he did he sensed two things:
first, that that virtually instinctive action
committed him to fight, and second, that in his
clumsy hand the weapon would serve less to
defend him than to justify the other man's
killing him. he had toyed with a knife now and
then, as all men did, but his knowledge of knife
fighting went no further than a vague
recollection that thrusts should be aimed
upward, and with the blade facing inward.
they'd never have allowed this sort of thing to
happen in the sanatorium, he thought.
"enough stalling," the other man said. "let's
go outside."
they went outside, and while there was no
hope in dahlmann, there was no fear, either. as
he crossed the threshold, he felt that on that
first night in the sanatorium, when they'd stuck
that needle in him, dying in a knife fight under
the open sky, grappling with his adversary,
would have been a liberation, a joy, and a fiesta.
he sensed that had he been able to choose or
dream his death that night, this is the death he
would have dreamed or chosen.
dahlmann firmly grips the knife, which he
may have no idea how to manage, and steps out
into the plains.
the aleph
(1949)
the immortal
solomon saith: there is no new thing upon
the earth. so that as plato had an imagination,
that all knowledge was but remembrance; so
solomon giveth his sentence, that all novelty is
but oblivion.
francis bacon: essays, lviii
in london, in early june of the year 1929, 
the rare book dealer joseph cartaphilus, of
smyrna, offered the princess de lucinge the six
quarto minor volumes (1715-1720) of pope's
iliad. the princess purchased them; when she
took possession of them, she exchanged a few
words with the dealer. he was, she says, an
emaciated, grimy man with gray eyes and gray
beard and singularly vague features. he
expressed himself with untutored and
uncorrected fluency in several languages;
within scant minutes he shifted from french to
english and from english to an enigmatic cross
between the spanish of salonika and the
portuguese of macao. in october, the princess
heard from a passenger on the zeus that
cartaphilus had died at sea while returning to
smyrna, and that he had been buried on the
island of cos.
in the last volume of the iliad she found this
manuscript.
it is written in an english that teems with
latinisms; this is a verbatim transcription of
the document. 
i
as i recall, my travails began in a garden in
hundred-gated thebes, in the time of the
emperor diocletian. i had fought (with no
glory) in the recent egyptian wars and was
tribune of a legion quartered in berenice, on the
banks of the red sea; there, fever and magic
consumed many men who magnanimously
coveted the steel blade. the mauritanians were
defeated; the lands once occupied by the rebel
cities were dedicated in œternitatem to the
plutonian gods; alexandria, subdued, in vain
sought caesar's mercy; within the year the
legions were to report their triumph, but i
myself barely glimpsed the face of mars. that
privation grieved me, and was perhaps why i
threw myself into the quest, through vagrant
and terrible deserts, for the secret city of the
immortals.
my travails, i have said, began in a garden in
thebes. all that night i did not sleep, for there
was a combat in my heart. i rose at last a little
before dawn. my slaves were sleeping; the
moon was the color of the infinite sand. a
bloody rider was approaching from the east,
weak with exhaustion. a few steps from me, he
dismounted and in a faint, insatiable voice
asked me, in latin, the name of the river whose
waters laved the city's walls. i told him it was
the egypt, fed by the rains. "it is another river
that i seek," he replied morosely, "the secret
river that purifies men of death." dark blood
was welling from his breast. he told me that the
country of his birth was a mountain that lay
beyond the ganges; it was rumored on that
mountain, he told me, that if one traveled
westward, to the end of the world, one would
come to the river whose waters give
immortality. he added that on the far shore of
that river lay the city of the immortals, a city
rich in bulwarks and amphitheaters and
temples. he died before dawn, but i resolved to
go in quest of that city and its river. when
interrogated by the torturer, some of the
mauritanian prisoners confirmed the traveler's
tale: one of them recalled the elysian plain, far
at the ends of the earth, where men's lives are
everlasting; another, the peaks from which the 
pactolus flows, upon which men live for a
hundred years. in rome, i spoke with
philosophers who felt that to draw out the span
of a man's life was to draw out the agony of his
dying and multiply the number of his deaths. i
am not certain whether i ever believed in the
city of the immortals; i think the task of finding
it was enough for me. flavius, the getulian
proconsul, entrusted two hundred soldiers to
me for the venture; i also recruited a number of
mercenaries who claimed they knew the roads,
and who were the first to desert.
subsequent events have so distorted the
memory of our first days that now they are
impossible to put straight. we set out from
arsinoë and entered the ardent desert. we
crossed the lands of the troglodytes, who
devour serpents and lack all verbal commerce;
the land of the garamantas, whose women are
held in common and whose food is lions; the
land of the augiles, who worship only tartarus.
we ranged the width and breadth of other
deserts—deserts of black sand, where the
traveler must usurp the hours of the night, for 
the fervency of the day is unbearable. from afar
i made out the mountain which gives its name
to the ocean; on its slopes grows the euphorbia,
an antidote to poisons, and on its peak live the
satyrs, a nation of wild and rustic men given to
lasciviousness. that the bosom of those
barbaric lands, where the earth is the mother of
monsters, might succor a famous city—such a
thing seemed unthinkable to us all. thus we
continued with our march, for to have regressed
would have been to dishonor ourselves. some of
the men, those who were most temerarious,
slept with their faces exposed to the moon; soon
they burned with fever. with the depraved
water of the watering holes others drank up
insanity and death. then began the desertions;
a short time afterward, the mutinies. in
repressing them i did not hesitate to employ
severity. in that i acted justly, but a centurion
warned me that the mutineers (keen to avenge
the crucifixion of one of their number) were
weaving a plot for my death. i fled the camp
with the few soldiers who were loyal to me; in
the desert, among whirlwinds of sand and the
vast night, we became separated. a cretan
arrow rent my flesh. for several days i
wandered without finding water—or one huge
day multiplied by the sun, thirst, and the fear of
thirst. i left my path to the will of my horse. at
dawn, the distance bristled with pyramids and
towers. i dreamed, unbearably, of a small and
orderly labyrinth at whose center lay a well; my
hands could almost touch it, my eyes see it, but
so bewildering and entangled were the turns
that i knew i would die before i reached it.
ii
when i disentangled myself at last from that
nightmare, i found that my hands were bound
behind my back and i was lying in an oblong
stone niche no bigger than a common grave,
scraped into the caustic slope of a mountain.
the sides of the cavity were humid, and had
been polished as much by time as by human
hands. in my chest i felt a painful throbbing,
and i burned with thirst. i raised my head and
cried out weakly. at the foot of the mountain
ran a noiseless, impure stream, clogged by sand 
and rubble; on the far bank, the patent city of
the immortals shone dazzlingly in the last (or
first) rays of the sun. i could see fortifications,
arches, frontispieces, and forums; the
foundation of it all was a stone plateau. a
hundred or more irregular niches like my own
riddled the mountain and the valley. in the
sand had been dug shallow holes; from those
wretched holes, from the niches, emerged
naked men with gray skin and neglected beards.
i thought i recognized these men: they
belonged to the bestial lineage of the
troglodytes, who infest the shorelines of the
persian gulf and the grottoes of ethiopia; i was
surprised neither by the fact that they did not
speak nor by seeing them devour serpents.
urgent thirst lent me temerity. i estimated
that i was some thirty paces from the sand; i
closed my eyes and threw myself down the
mountain, my hands bound behind my back. i
plunged my bloodied face into the dark water
and lapped at it like an animal. before i lost
myself in sleep and delirium once more, i
inexplicably repeated a few words of greek:
those from zeleia, wealthy trojans, who drink
the water of dark aisepos...
i cannot say how many days and nights
passed over me. in pain, unable to return to the
shelter of the caverns, naked on the unknown
sand, i let the moon and the sun cast lots for my
bleak fate. the troglodytes, childlike in their
barbarity, helped me neither survive nor die. in
vain did i plead with them to kill me. one day,
with the sharp edge of a flake of rock, i severed
my bonds. the next, i stood up and was able to
beg or steal—i, marcus flaminius rufus,
military tribune of one of the legions of rome
—my first abominated mouthful of serpent's
flesh.
out of avidity to see the immortals, to touch
that more than human city, i could hardly
sleep. and as though the troglodytes could
divine my goal, they did not sleep, either. at
first i presumed they were keeping a watch over
me; later, i imagined that my uneasiness had
communicated itself to them, as dogs can be
infected in that way. for my departure from the
barbarous village i chose the most public of
times, sunset, when almost all the men emerged
from their holes and crevices in the earth and
gazed out unseeingly toward the west. i prayed
aloud, less to plead for divine favor than to
intimidate the tribe with articulate speech. i
crossed the stream bed clogged with sandbars
and turned my steps toward the city.
two or three men followed me confusedly;
they were of short stature (like the others of
that species), and inspired more revulsion than
fear. i had to skirt a number of irregular pits
that i took to be ancient quarries; misled by the
city's enormous size, i had thought it was much
nearer. toward midnight, i set my foot upon
the black shadow—bristling with idolatrous
shapes upon the yellow sand—of the city's wall.
my steps were halted by a kind of sacred horror.
so abhorred by mankind are novelty and the
desert that i was cheered to note that one of the
troglodytes had accompanied me to the last. i
closed my eyes and waited, unsleeping, for the
dawn.
i have said that the city was builded on a
stone plateau. that plateau, with its precipitous 
sides, was as difficult to scale as the walls. in
vain did my weary feet walk round it; the black
foundation revealed not the slightest
irregularity, and the invariance of the walls
proscribed even a single door. the force of the
day drove me to seek refuge in a cavern; toward
the rear there was a pit, and out of the pit, out
of the gloom below, rose a ladder. i descended
the ladder and made my way through a chaos of
squalid galleries to a vast, indistinct circular
chamber. nine doors opened into that cellarlike
place; eight led to a maze that returned,
deceitfully, to the same chamber; the ninth led
through another maze to a second circular
chamber identical to the first. i am not certain
how many chambers there were; my misery and
anxiety multiplied them. the silence was
hostile, and virtually perfect; aside from a
subterranean wind whose cause i never
discovered, within those deep webs of stone
there was no sound; even the thin streams of
iron-colored water that trickled through
crevices in the stone were noiseless. horribly, i
grew used to that dubious world; it began to
seem incredible that anything could exist save
nine-doored cellars and long, forking
subterranean corridors. i know not how long i
wandered under the earth; i do know that from
time to time, in a confused dream of home, i
conflated the horrendous village of the
barbarians and the city of my birth, among the
clusters of grapes.
at the end of one corridor, a not unforeseen
wall blocked my path— and a distant light fell
upon me. i raised my dazzled eyes; above,
vertiginously high above, i saw a circle of sky so
blue it was almost purple. the metal treads of a
stairway led up the wall. weariness made my
muscles slack, but i climbed the stairs, only
pausing from time to time to sob clumsily with
joy. little by little i began to discern friezes and
the capitals of columns, triangular pediments
and vaults, confused glories carved in granite
and marble. thus it was that i was led to ascend
from the blind realm of black and intertwining
labyrinths into the brilliant city.
i emerged into a kind of small plaza—a
courtyard might better describe it. it was
surrounded by a single building, of irregular
angles and varying heights. it was to this
heterogeneous building that the many cupolas
and columns belonged. more than any other
feature of that incredible monument, i was
arrested by the great antiquity of its
construction. i felt that it had existed before
humankind, before the world itself.
its patent antiquity (though somehow
terrible to the eyes) seemed to accord with the
labor of immortal artificers. cautiously at first,
with indifference as time went on, desperately
toward the end, i wandered the staircases and
inlaid floors of that labyrinthine palace. (i
discovered afterward that the width and height
of the treads on the staircases were not
constant; it was this that explained the
extraordinary weariness i felt.) this palace is
the work of the gods, was my first thought. i
explored the uninhabited spaces, and i
corrected myself: the gods that built this place
have died. then i reflected upon its
peculiarities, and told myself: the gods that
built this place were mad. i said this, i know, 
in a tone of incomprehensible reproof that
verged upon remorse—with more intellectual
horror than sensory fear.
the impression of great antiquity was joined
by others: the impression of endlessness, the
sensation of oppressiveness and horror, the
sensation of complex irrationality. i had made
my way through a dark maze, but it was the
bright city of the immortals that terrified and
repelled me. a maze is a house built purposely
to confuse men; its architecture, prodigal in
symmetries, is made to serve that purpose. in
the palace that i imperfectly explored, the
architecture had no purpose. there were
corridors that led nowhere, unreachably high
windows, grandly dramatic doors that opened
onto monklike cells or empty shafts, incredible
upside-down staircases with upside-down
treads and balustrades. other staircases,
clinging airily to the side of a monumental wall,
petered out after two or three landings, in the
high gloom of the cupolas, arriving nowhere. i
cannot say whether these are literal examples i
have given; i do know that for many years they 
plagued my troubled dreams; i can no longer
know whether any given feature is a faithful
transcription of reality or one of the shapes
unleashed by my nights. this city, i thought, is
so horrific that its mere existence, the mere fact
of its having endured — even in the middle of a
secret desert— pollutes the past and the future
and somehow compromises the stars. so long
as this city endures, no one in the world can
ever be happy or courageous. i do not want to
describe it; a chaos of heterogeneous words, the
body of a tiger or a bull pullulating with teeth,
organs, and heads monstrously yoked together
yet hating each other—those might, perhaps, be
approximate images.
i cannot recall the stages by which i
returned, nor my path through the dusty,
humid crypts. i know only that i was
accompanied by the constant fear that when i
emerged from the last labyrinth i would be
surrounded once again by the abominable city
of the immortals. i remember nothing else.
that loss of memory, now insurmountable, was
perhaps willful; it is possible that the
circumstances of my escape were so unpleasant
that on some day no less lost to memory i swore
to put them out of my mind.
iii
those who have read the story of my travails
attentively will recall that a man of the
troglodyte tribe had followed me, as a dog
might have, into the jagged shadow of the walls.
when i emerged from the last cellar, i found
him at the mouth of the cavern. he was lying in
the sand, clumsily drawing and rubbing out a
row of symbols that resembled those letters in
dreams that one is just on the verge of
understanding when they merge and blur. at
first i thought that this was some sort of
barbaric writing; then i realized that it was
absurd to imagine that men who had never
learned to speak should have invented writing.
nor did any one of the shapes resemble any
other—a fact that ruled out (or made quite
remote) the possibility that they were symbols.
the man would draw them, look at them, and
correct them. then suddenly, as though his
game irritated him, he would rub them out with
his palm and forearm. he looked up at me,
though he seemed not to recognize me. still, so
great was the relief i felt (or so great, so
dreadful had my loneliness been) that i actually
thought that this primitive troglodyte looking
up at me from the floor of a cave had been
waiting for me. the sun warmed the plain; as
we began our return to the village, under the
first stars of evening, the sand burned our feet.
the troglodyte walked ahead of me; that night i
resolved to teach him to recognize, perhaps
even to repeat, a few words. dogs and horses, i
reflected, are able to do the first; many birds,
like the caesars' nightingale, can do the second.
however scant a man's understanding, it will
always be greater than that of unreasoning
beasts.
the troglodyte's lowly birth and condition
recalled to my memory the image of argos, the
moribund old dog of the odyssey, so i gave
him the name argos, and tried to teach it to
him. time and time again, i failed. no means i
employed, no severity, no obstinacy of mine 
availed. motionless, his eyes dead, he seemed
not even to perceive the sounds which i was
attempting to imprint upon him. though but a
few paces from me, he seemed immensely
distant. lying in the sand like a small, battered
sphinx carved from lava, he allowed the
heavens to circle in the sky above him from the
first dusky light of morning to the last dusky
light of night. it seemed simply impossible that
he had not grasped my intention. i recalled that
it is generally believed among the ethiopians
that monkeys deliberately do not speak, so that
they will not be forced to work; i attributed
argos' silence to distrust or fear. from that
vivid picture i passed on to others, even more
extravagant. i reflected that argos and i lived
our lives in separate universes; i reflected that
our perceptions were identical but that argos
combined them differently than i, constructed
from them different objects; i reflected that
perhaps for him there were no objects, but
rather a constant, dizzying play of swift
impressions. i imagined a world without
memory, without time; i toyed with the
possibility of a language that had no nouns, a
language of impersonal verbs or indeclinable
adjectives. in these reflections many days went
by, and with the days, years. until one morning,
something very much like joy occurred—the sky
rained slow, strong rain.
nights in the desert can be frigid, but that
night had been like a cauldron. i dreamed that a
river in thessaly (into whose waters i had
thrown back a golden fish) was coming to save
me; i could hear it approaching over the red
sand and the black rock; a coolness in the air
and the scurrying sound of rain awakened me. i
ran out naked to welcome it. the night was
waning; under the yellow clouds, the tribe, as
joyously as i, was offering itself up to the vivid
torrents in a kind of ecstasy—they reminded me
of corybantes possessed by the god. argos, his
eyes fixed on the empyrean, was moaning;
streams of water rolled down his face—not just
rain, but also (i later learned) tears. argos, i
cried, argos!
then, with gentle wonder, as though
discovering something lost and forgotten for
many years, argos stammered out these words:
argos, ulysses' dog. and then, without looking
at me, this dog lying on the dungheap.
we accept reality so readily—perhaps
because we sense that nothing is real. i asked
argos how much of the odyssey he knew. he
found using greek difficult; i had to repeat the
question.
very little, he replied. less than the
meagerest rhapsode. it has been eleven
hundred years since last i wrote it.
iv
that day, all was revealed to me. the
troglodytes were the immortals; the stream
and its sand-laden waters, the river sought by
the rider. as for the city whose renown had
spread to the very ganges, the immortals had
destroyed it almost nine hundred years ago. out
of the shattered remains of the city's ruin they
had built on the same spot the incoherent city i
had wandered through—that parody or
antithesis of city which was also a temple to the
irrational gods that rule the world and to those 
gods about whom we know nothing save that
they do not resemble man. the founding of this
city was the last symbol to which the immortals
had descended; it marks the point at which,
esteeming all exertion vain, they resolved to live
in thought, in pure speculation. they built that
carapace, abandoned it, and went off to make
their dwellings in the caves. in their selfabsorption,
they scarcely perceived the physical
world.
these things were explained to me by homer
as one might explain things to a child. he also
told me of his own old age and of that late
journey he had made—driven, like ulysses, by
the intention to arrive at the nation of men that
know not what the sea is, that eat not salted
meat, that know not what an oar might be. he
lived for a century in the city of the immortals,
and when it was destroyed it was he who
counseled that this other one be built. we
should not be surprised by that—it is rumored
that after singing of the war of ilion, he sang of
the war between the frogs and rats. he was like
a god who created first the cosmos, and then
chaos.
there is nothing very remarkable about
being immortal; with the exception of mankind,
all creatures are immortal, for they know
nothing of death. what is divine, terrible, and
incomprehensible is to know oneself immortal.
i have noticed that in spite of religion, the
conviction as to one's own immortality is
extraordinarily rare. jews, christians, and
muslims all profess belief in immortality, but
the veneration paid to the first century of life is
proof that they truly believe only in those
hundred years, for they destine all the rest,
throughout eternity, to rewarding or punishing
what one did when alive. in my view, the
wheel conceived by certain religions in
hindustan is much more plausible; on that
wheel, which has neither end nor beginning,
each life is the effect of the previous life and
engenderer of the next, yet no one life
determines the whole.... taught by centuries of
living, the republic of immortal men had
achieved a perfection of tolerance, almost of
disdain. they knew that over an infinitely long 
span of time, all things happen to all men. as
reward for his past and future virtues, every
man merited every kindness—yet also every
betrayal, as reward for his past and future
iniquities. much as the way in games of chance,
heads and tails tend to even out, so cleverness
and dullness cancel and correct each other.
perhaps the rude poem of el cid is the
counterweight demanded by a single epithet of
the eclogues or a maxim from heraclitus. the
most fleeting thought obeys an invisible plan,
and may crown, or inaugurate, a secret design. i
know of men who have done evil in order that
good may come of it in future centuries, or may
already have come of it in centuries past....
viewed in that way, all our acts are just, though
also unimportant. there are no spiritual or
intellectual merits. homer composed the
odyssey; given infinite time, with infinite
circumstances and changes, it is impossible that
the odyssey should not be composed at least
once. no one is someone; a single immortal
man is all men. like cornelius agrippa,i am
god, hero, philosopher, demon, and world—
which is a long-winded way of saying that aim
not.
the notion of the world as a system of exact
compensations had an enormous influence on
the immortals. in the first place, it made them
immune to pity. i have mentioned the ancient
quarries that dotted the countryside on the far
bank of the stream; a man fell into the deepest
of those pits; he could not be hurt, could not
die, and yet he burned with thirst; seventy years
passed before he was thrown a rope. nor was he
much interested in his own fate. his body was a
submissive domestic animal; all the charity it
required each month was a few hours' sleep, a
little water, and a scrap of meat. but let no one
imagine that we were mere ascetics. there is no
more complex pleasure than thought, and it was
to thought that we delivered ourselves over.
from time to time, some extraordinary
stimulus might bring us back to the physical
world—for example, on that dawn, the ancient
elemental pleasure of the rain. but those lapses
were extremely rare; all immortals were
capable of perfect quietude. i recall one whom i 
never saw standing—a bird had made its nest
on his breast.
among the corollaries to the doctrine that
there is no thing that is not counterbalanced by
another, there is one that has little theoretical
importance but that caused us, at the beginning
or end of the tenth century, to scatter over the
face of the earth. it may be summarized in these
words: there is a river whose waters give
immortality; somewhere there must be
another river whose waters take it away. the
number of rivers is not infinite; an immortal
traveler wandering the world will someday have
drunk from them all. we resolved to find that
river.
death (or reference to death) makes men
precious and pathetic; their ghostliness is
touching; any act they perform may be their
last; there is no face that is not on the verge of
blurring and fading away like the faces in a
dream. everything in the world of mortals has
the value of the irrecoverable and contingent.
among the immortals, on the other hand,
every act (every thought) is the echo of others
that preceded it in the past, with no visible
beginning, and the faithful presage of others
that will repeat it in the future, advertiginem.
there is nothing that is not as though lost
between indefatigable mirrors. nothing can
occur but once, nothing is preciously in peril of
being lost. the elegiac, the somber, the
ceremonial are not modes the immortals hold
in reverence. homer and i went our separate
ways at the portals of tangier; i do not think we
said good-bye.
i wandered through new realms, new
empires. in the autumn of 1066 i fought at
stamford bridge, though i no longer recall
whether i stood in the ranks of harold, soon to
meet his fate, or in the ranks of that ill-fated
harald hardrada who conquered only six feet
or a little more of english soil. in the seventh
century of the hegira, on the outskirts of bulaq,
i transcribed with deliberate calligraphy, in a
language i have forgotten, in an alphabet i
know not, the seven voyages of sindbad and the
story of the city of brass. in a courtyard of the
prison in samarkand i often played chess. in
bikanir i have taught astrology, as i have in
bohemia. in 1638 i was in kolzsvar, and later in
leipzig. in aberdeen, in 1714, i subscribed to
the six volumes of pope's iliad; i know i often
perused them with delight. in 1729 or
thereabouts, i discussed the origin of that poem
with a professor of rhetoric whose name, i
believe, was giambattista; his arguments struck
me as irrefutable. on october 4,1921, the
patna, which was taking me to bombay, ran
aground in a harbor on the eritrean coast.1
1part of the ms. is scratched out just here; the
name of the port may have been erased.
i disembarked; there came to my mind other
mornings, long in the past, when i had also
looked out over the red sea—when i was a
roman tribune, and fever and magic and
inactivity consumed the soldiers. outside the
city i saw a spring; impelled by habit, i tasted
its clear water. as i scaled the steep bank beside
it, a thorny tree scratched the back of my hand.
the unaccustomed pain seemed exceedingly
sharp. incredulous, speechless, and in joy, i
contemplated the precious formation of a slow 
drop of blood. i am once more mortal, i told
myself over and over, again i am like all other
men. that night, i slept until daybreak.
... a year has passed, and i reread these
pages. i can attest that they do not stray beyond
the bounds of truth, although in the first
chapters, and even in certain paragraphs of
others, i believe i detect a certain falseness.
that is due, perhaps, to an over-employment of
circumstantial details, a way of writing that i
learned from poets; it is a procedure that infects
everything with falseness, since there may be a
wealth of details in the event, yet not in
memory.... i believe, nonetheless, that i have
discovered a more private and inward reason. i
will reveal it; it does not matter that i may be
judged a fantast.
the story i have told seems unreal because
the experiences of two different men are
intermingled in it. in the first chapter, the
horseman wishes to know the name of the river
that runs beside the walls of thebes; flaminius
rufus, who had bestowed upon the city the
epithet "hundred-gated," tells him that the river
is the "egypt"; neither of those statements
belongs to him, but rather to homer, who in
the iliad expressly mentions "thebes
hekatompylos" and who in the odyssey,
through the mouths of proteus and ulysses,
invariably calls the nile the "egypt." in the
second chapter, when the roman drinks the
immortal water he speaks a few words in greek.
those words are also homeric; they may be
found at the end of the famous catalog of the
ships. later, in the dizzying palace, he speaks of
"a reproof that was almost remorse"; those
words, too, belong to homer, who had foreseen
such a horror. such anomalies disturbed me;
others, of an aesthetic nature, allowed me to
discover the truth. the clues of this latter type
may be found in the last chapter, which says
that i fought at stamford bridge, that in bulaq i
transcribed the voyages of sindbad the sailor,
and that in aberdeen i subscribed to pope's
english iliad.
the text says, inter alia: "in bikanir i have
taught astrology, as i have in bohemia." none
of those statements is false; what is significant
is the fact of their having been chosen to record.
the first seems to befit a man of war, but then
one sees that the narrator pays little attention
to the war, much more to the fate of the men.
the "facts" that follow are even more curious. a
dark yet elemental reason led me to put them to
paper: i knew they were pathetic. they are not
pathetic when narrated by the roman
flaminius rufus; they are when narrated by
homer. it is odd that homer, in the thirteenth
century, should have copied down the
adventures of sindbad—another ulysses—and
again after many hundreds of years have
discovered forms like those of his own iliad in a
northern kingdom and a barbaric tongue. as for
the sentence that contains the name "bikanir,"
one can see that it has been composed by a man
of letters desirous (like the author of the catalog
of ships) of wielding splendid words.2
2 ernesto sabato suggests that the
"giambattista" who discussed the origins of the
iliad with the rare book dealer cartaphilus is
giambattista vico, the italian who defended the 
argument that homer is a symbolic character,
like pluto or achilles.
as the end approaches, there are no longer
any images from memory— there are only
words. it is not strange that time may have
confused those that once portrayed me with
those that were symbols of the fate of the
person that accompanied me for so many
centuries. i have been homer; soon, like
ulysses, i shall be nobody; soon, i shall be all
men—i shall be dead.
postcript (1950): among the commentaries
inspired by the foregoing publication, the most
curious (if not most urbane) is biblically titled a
coat of many colours (manchester, 1948); it is
the work of the supremely persévérant pen of
dr. nahum cordovero, and contains some
hundred pages. it speaks of the greek
anthologies, of the anthologies of late latin
texts, of that ben johnson who defined his
contemporaries with excerpts from seneca, of
alexander ross's virgilius evangelizans, of the
artifices of george moore and eliot, and, finally,
of "the tale attributed to the rare-book dealer
joseph cartaphilus." in the first chapter it
points out brief interpolations from pliny
(historia naturate, v:8); in the second, from
thomas de quincey (writings, iii: 439); in the
third, from a letter written by descartes to the
ambassador pierre chanut; in the fourth, from
bernard shaw (back to methuselah, v). from
those
"intrusions" (or thefts) it infers that the
entire document is apocryphal.
to my way of thinking, that conclusion is
unacceptable. as the end approaches, wrote
cartaphilus, there are no longer any images
from memory — there are only words. words,
words, words taken out of place and mutilated,
words from other men—those were the alms left
him by the hours and the centuries.
for cecilia ingenieros
the dead man
that a man from the outskirts of buenos
aires, a sad sort of hoodlum whose only
recommendation was his infatuation with
courage, should go out into the wilderness of
horse country along the brazilian frontier and
become a leader of a band of smugglers—such a
thing would, on the face of it, seem impossible.
for those who think so, i want to tell the story
of the fate of benjamin otálora, whom no one
may remember anymore in the neighborhood of
balvanera but who died as he lived, by a bullet,
in the province of rio grande do sul.*i do not
know the full details of his adventure; when i
am apprised of them, i will correct and expand
these pages. for now, this summary may be
instructive: in 1891, benjamín otálora is
nineteen years old—a strapping young man
with a miserly brow, earnest blue eyes, and the
strength and stamina of a basque. a lucky knife
thrust has revealed to him that he is a man of
courage; he is not distressed by the death of his
opponent, or by the immediate need to flee the 
country. the ward boss of his parish gives him a
letter of introduction to a man named azevedo
bandeira, over in uruguay. otáloratakes ship;
the crossing is stormy, creaking; the next day
finds him wandering aimlessly through the
streets of montevideo, with unconfessed and
perhaps unrecognized sadness. he doesn't
manage to come across azevedo bandeira.
toward midnight, in a general-store-and-bar in
paso del molino,*he witnesses a fight between
two cattle drovers. a knife gleams; otálora
doesn't know whose side he should be on, but
he is attracted by the pure taste of danger, the
way other men are attracted by gambling or
music. in the confusion, he checks a low thrust
meant for a man in a broad-brimmed black hat
and a poncho. that man later turns out to be
azevedo bandeira. (when otálora discovers
this, he tears up the letter of introduction,
because he'd rather all the credit be his alone.)
though azevedo bandeira is a strong, well-built
man, he gives the unjustifiable impression of
being something of a fake, a forgery. in his face
(which is always too close) there mingle the
jew, the negro, and the indian; in his air, the
monkey and the tiger; the scar that crosses his
face is just another piece of decoration, like the
bristling black mustache.
whether it's a projection or an error caused
by drink, the fight stops as quickly as it started.
otálora drinks with the cattle drovers and then
goes out carousing with them and then
accompanies them to a big house in the old
city—by now the sun is high in the sky. out in
the back patio, the men lay out their bedrolls.
otálora vaguely compares that night with the
previous one; now he is on terra firma, among
friends. he does, he has to admit, feel a small
twinge of remorse at not missing buenos aires.
he sleeps till orisons, when he is awakened by
the same paisano who had drunkenly attacked
bandeira. (otálora recalls that this man has
been with the others, drunk with them, made
the rounds of the city with them, that bandeira
sat him at his right hand and made him keep
drinking.) the man tells him the boss wants to
see him. in a kind of office that opens off the
long entryway at the front of the house(otálora
has never seen an entryway with doors opening
off it),azevedo bandeira is waiting for him, with
a splendid, contemptuous red-haired woman.
bandeira heaps praise on otálora, offers him a
glass of harsh brandy, tells him again that he
looks like a man of mettle, and asks him if he'd
like to go up north with the boys to bring a herd
back. otálora takes the job; by dawn the next
morning they are on their way to tacuarembó.
that is the moment at which otálora begins
a new life, a life of vast sunrises and days that
smell of horses.
this life is new to him, and sometimes
terrible, and yet it is in his blood, for just as the
men of other lands worship the sea and can feel
it deep inside them, the men of ours (including
the man who weaves these symbols) yearn for
the inexhaustible plains that echo under the
horses' hooves. otálora has been brought up in
neighborhoods full of cart drivers and leather
braiders; within a year, he has become a
gaucho. he learns to ride, to keep the horses
together, to butcher the animals, to use the rope
that lassos them and the bolas that bring them 
down, to bear up under weariness, storms, cold
weather, and the sun, to herd the animals with
whistles and shouts. only once during this
period of apprenticeship does he see azevedo
bandeira, but he is always aware of his
presence, because to be a "bandeira man" is to
be taken seriously—in fact, to be feared—and
because no matter the deed of manly strength
or courage they see done, the gauchos say
bandeira does it better. one of them says he
thinks bandeira was born on the other side of
the cuareim, in rio grande do sul; that fact,
which ought to bring him down a notch or two
in their estimation, lends his aura a vague new
wealth of teeming forests, swamps,
impenetrable and almost infinite distances.
gradually, otalora realizes that bandeira has
many irons in the fire, and that his main
business is smuggling. being a drover is being a
servant; otalora decides to rise higher—decides
to become a smuggler. one night, two of his
companions are to cross the border to bring
back several loads of brandy; otalora provokes
one of them, wounds him, and takes his place. 
he is moved by ambition, but also by an
obscure loyalty. once and for all (he thinks) /
want the boss to see that i'm a better man than
all these uruguayans of his put together.
another year goes by before otalora returns
to montevideo. they ride through the outskirts,
and then through the city (which seems
enormous to otalora); they come to the boss's
house; the men lay out their bedrolls in the
back patio. days go by, and otalora hasn't seen
bandeira. they say, timorously, that he's sick; a
black man takes the kettle and mate up to him
in his room. one afternoon, otalora is asked to
carry the things up to bandeira. he feels
somehow humiliated by this, but derives some
pride from it, too.
the bedroom is dark and shabby. there is a
balcony facing west, a long table with a
gleaming jumble of quirts and bullwhips,
cinches, firearms, and knives, a distant mirror
of cloudy glass. bandeira is lying on his back,
dozing and moaning some; a vehemence of last
sunlight spotlights him. the vast white bed
makes him seem smaller, and somehow
dimmer; otalora notes the gray hairs, the
weariness, the slackness, and the lines of age. it
suddenly galls him that it's this old man that's
giving them their orders.
one thrust, he thinks, would be enough to
settle that matter. just then, he sees in the
mirror that someone has come into the room. it
is the redheaded woman; she is barefoot and
half dressed, and staring at him with cold
curiosity. bandeira sits up; while he talks about
things out on the range and sips mate after
mate, his fingers toy with the woman's hair.
finally, he gives otalora leave to go.
days later, they receive the order to head up
north again. they come to a godforsaken ranch
somewhere (that could be anywhere) in the
middle of the unending plains. not a tree, not a
stream of water soften the place; the sun beats
down on it from first light to last. there are
stone corrals for the stock, which is longhorned
and poorly. the miserable place is
called el suspiro—the sigh.
otálora hears from the peons that bandeira
will be coming up from montevideo before long. 
he asks why, and somebody explains that
there's a foreigner, a would-be gaucho type,
that's getting too big for his britches. otálora
takes this as a joke, but he's flattered that the
joke is possible. he later finds out that bandeira
has had a falling-out with some politico and the
politico has withdrawn his protection. the news
pleases otálora.
crates of firearms begin to arrive; a silver
washbowl and pitcher arrive for the woman's
bedroom, then curtains of elaborately figured
damask; one morning a somber-faced rider
with a thick beard and a poncho rides down
from up in the mountains. his name is ulpiano
suarez, and he is azevedo bandeira's capanga,
his foreman. he talks very little, and there is
something brazilian about his speech when he
does. otálora doesn't know whether to attribute
the man's reserve to hostility, contempt, or
mere savagery, but he does know that for the
plan he has in mind he has to win his
friendship.
at this point there enters into benjamín
otálora's life a sorrel with black feet, mane, and 
muzzle. azevedo bandeira brings the horse up
with him from the south; its bridle and all its
other gear is tipped with silver and the bindings
on its saddle are of jaguar skin. that
extravagant horse is a symbol of the boss's
authority, which is why the youth covets it, and
why he also comes to covet, with grudge-filled
desire, the woman with the resplendent hair.
the woman, the gear, and the sorrel are
attributes (adjectives) of a man he hopes to
destroy.
here, the story grows deeper and more
complicated. azevedo bandeira is accomplished
in the art of progressive humiliation, the satanic
ability to humiliate his interlocutor little by
little, step by step, with a combination of truths
and evasions; otálora decides to employ that
same ambiguous method for the hard task he
has set himself. he decides that he will
gradually push azevedo bandeira out of the
picture.
through days of common danger he
manages to win suárez 'friendship. he confides
his plan to him, and suárez promises to help. 
many things happen after this, some of which i
know about: otálora doesn't obey bandeira; he
keeps forgetting, improving his orders, even
turning them upside down. the universe seems
to conspire with him, and things move very fast.
one noon, there is a shoot-out with men from
rio grande do sul on the prairies bordering the
tacuarembó. otálora usurps bandeira's place
and gives the uruguayans orders. he is shot in
the shoulder, but that afternoon otálora goes
back to el suspiro on the boss's sorrel and that
afternoon a few drops of his blood stain the
jaguarskin and that night he sleeps with the
woman with the shining hair. other versions
change the order of these events and even deny
that they all occurred on a single day.
though bandeira is still nominally the boss,
he gives orders that aren't carried out;
benjamín otálora never touches him, out of a
mixture of habit and pity.
the last scene of the story takes place during
the excitement of the last night of 1894. that
night, the men of el suspiro eat freshbutchered
lamb and drink bellicose liquor.
somebody is infinitely strumming at a milonga
that he has some difficulty playing. at the head
of the table, otálora ,drunk, builds exultancy
upon exultancy, jubilation upon jubilation; that
vertiginous tower is a symbol of his inexorable
fate. bandeira, taciturn among the boisterous
men, lets the night take its clamorous course.
when the twelve strokes of the clock chime at
last, he stands up like a man remembering an
engagement. he stands up and knocks softly on
the woman's door. she opens it immediately, as
though she were waiting for the knock. she
comes out barefoot and half dressed. in an
effeminate, wheedling voice, the boss speaks an
order:
"since you and the city slicker there are so in
love, go give him a kiss so everybody can see."
he adds a vulgar detail. the woman tries to
resist, but two men have taken her by the arms,
and they throw her on top of otálora. in tears,
she kisses his face and his chest. ulpiano suárez
has pulled his gun .otálora realizes, before he
dies, that he has been betrayed from the
beginning, that he has been sentenced to death, 
that he has been allowed to love, to command,
and win because he was already as good as
dead, because so far as bandeira was
concerned, he was already a dead man.
suárez fires, almost with a sneer.
the theologians
the gardens ravaged, the altars and chalices
profaned, the huns rode their horses into the
monastery library and mangled the
incomprehensible books and reviled and
burned them—fearful perhaps that the letters of
the books might harbor blasphemies against
their god, which was a scimitar of iron. they
burned palimpsests and codices, but in the
heart of the bonfire, among the ashes, there lay,
virtually untouched by the flames, the twelfth
book of the civitas dei, which says that in
athens plato once taught that at the end of time
all things will return again to where they once
were—that he, in athens, before the same circle 
of listeners, will one day teach that doctrine
once again. that text spared by the flames came
to enjoy a special veneration; those who read
and reread it in that remote province came to
forget that the author put forth the doctrine
only in order more roundly to refute it. a
hundred years later, aurelian, bishop-coadjutor
of aquileia, learned that on the banks of the
danube the newborn sect called the monotoni
(also the annulari) was claiming that history is
a circle, and that all things that exist have
existed before and will exist again. in the
mountains, the wheel and the serpent had
supplanted the cross. fear gripped all men's
hearts, yet all were comforted by the rumor that
john of pannonia, who had distinguished
himself by a treatise on the seventh attribute of
god, was preparing to refute this abominable
heresy.
aurelian deplored the entire situation—
especially this last report. he knew that in
theology, there is no novelty without danger;
then he reflected that the notion of circular time
was too strange, too shocking, for the danger to 
be very serious. (the heresies we ought to fear
are those that can be confused with orthodoxy.)
he was pained most of all by the intervention—
the intrusion—of john of pannonia. two years
before, john's verbose treatise de séptima
affectione dei sive de ceternitate had
trespassed upon aurelian's own field of
expertise; now, as though the problem of time
were his alone, john promised to set the
annulari right (no doubt with arguments
befitting procrustes, and remedies more terrible
than the serpent itself).... that night, aurelian
turned the pages of plutarch's ancient dialogue
on the ceasing of the oracles; in paragraph
twenty-nine, he read a gibe against the stoics,
who defended the idea of an infinite cycle of
worlds, with infinite suns, moons, apollos,
artemisias, and poseidons. his coming upon
this passage was a good omen; he resolved to
steal a march on john of pannonia and refute
the heretics of the wheel himself.
there are those who seek the love of a
woman in order to stop thinking of her, to put
her out of their mind; similarly, aurelian
wanted to outstrip john of pannonia not
because he wished to do him any harm, but in
order to cure himself of the grudge he held for
the man. his temper cooled by mere labor, by
the crafting of syllogisms and the invention of
contumely, by the nego's and autem's and
nequaquam's, the rancor dropped away. he
constructed vast labyrinthine periods, made
impassable by the piling-up of clauses upon
clauses—clauses in which oversight and bad
grammar seemed manifestations of disdain.
he crafted an instrument from cacophony.
he foresaw that john would thunder down on
the annulari with the gravity of a prophet;
resolved to come at the problem from a
different tack, he himself chose derision.
augustine had written that jesus was the
straight path that leads men out of the circular
labyrinth in which the impious wander;
aurelian, in his painstakingly trivial way,
compared the impious with ixion, with
prometheus' liver, with sisyphus, with that king
of thebes who saw two suns, with stuttering,
with parrots, mirrors, echoes, mules chained to 
tread-mills, and two-horned syllogisms. (the
heathen fables had managed to endure, though
reduced now to decoration.) like all those who
possess libraries, aurelian felt a nagging sense
of guilt at not being acquainted with every
volume in his; this controversy allowed him to
read many of the books that had seemed to
reproach his neglect. thus it was that he
inserted into his text a passage from origen's
de principii* in which origen denies that judas
iscariot will sell the lord again, that paul will
once more witness stephen's martyrdom in
jerusalem, and another passage from cicero's
académica priora in which cicero mocks those
who dream that while cicero is speaking with
lucullus, other luculluses and other ciceros,
infinite in number, speak precisely the same
words in infinite identical worlds. he also
scourged the monotoni with that text from
plutarch on the obsolescence of the oracles, and
decried the scandalous fact that the lumen
natures should mean more to an idolater than
the word of god to the monotoni. the labor of
composition took aurelian nine days; on the
tenth, he received a copy of the refutation
written by john of pannonia.
it was almost ludicrously brief; aurelian
looked at it with contempt, and then with
foreboding. the first section glossed the closing
verses of the ninth chapter of the epistle to the
hebrews, which say that jesus has not suffered
many times since the foundation of the world,
but has been sacrificed now, once, "in the end of
the world." the second section cited the biblical
injunction concerning the "vain repetitions" of
the heathens (matthew 6:7) and that passage
from the seventh book of pliny which praises
the fact that in all the wide universe there are
no two faces that are the same. john of
pannonia declared that no two souls were the
same, either, and that the basest sinner is as
precious as the blood shed for him by jesus
christ.
the act of a single man, he said, weighs more
than the nine concentric heavens, and to think,
erroneously, that it can be lost and then return
again is naught but spectacular foolishness.
time does not restore what we lose; eternity
holds it for glory, and also for the fire. john's
treatise was limpid, universal; it seemed written
not by a particular person, but by any man—or
perhaps all men.
aurelian felt an almost physical sense of
humiliation. he considered destroying or
reworking his own manuscript; then, with
grudging honesty, he sent it off to rome
without changing a letter. months later, when
the council of pergamo was convened, the
theologian entrusted with refuting the errors of
the monotoni was (predictably) john of
pannonia; his learned, measured refutation was
the argument that condemned the heresiarch
euphorbus to the stake. this has occurred
once, and will occur again, said euphorbus. it
is not one pyre you are lighting, it is a
labyrinth of fire. if all the fires on which i have
been burned were brought together here, the
earth would be too small for them, and the
angels would be blinded. these words i have
spoken many times. then he screamed, for the
flames had engulfed him.
the wheel fell to the cross,
1
[
1
in runic crosses the two enemy emblems
coexist, intertwined. ] but the secret battle
between john and aurelian continued. the two
men were soldiers in the same army, strove for
the same prize, fought against the same enemy,
yet aurelian wrote not a word that was not
aimed, however unconfessably, at besting john.
their duel was an invisible one; if i may trust
the swollen indices of migne's patrology, not
once does the other man's name figure in the
many volumes of aurelian's works collected
therein for posterity. (of john's writings, only
twenty words have survived.) both men
deplored the anathemas of the second council
of constantinople; both persecuted the arians,
who denied the eternal generation of the son;
both attested to the orthodoxy of cosmas'
topographia christiana, which taught that the
earth is foursquare, like the jewish tabernacle.
then, unfortunately, another tempestuous
heresy spread to those four corners of the earth.
spawned in egypt or in asia (for accounts
differ, and bousset refuses to accept harnack's
arguments), the sect soon infested the eastern
provinces, and sanctuaries were built in
macedonia, carthage, and trêves. it seemed to
be everywhere; people said that in the diocese
of britain crucifixes had been turned upside
down and in cassaria the image of the lord had
been supplanted by a mirror. the mirror and
the obolus were the emblems of these new
schismatics.
history knows them by many names
(speculari, abysmali, cainitœ), but the most
widely accepted is histrioni, the name that
aurelian gave them and that they defiantly
adopted for themselves. in phrygia, they were
called the simulacra, and in dardania as well.
john of damascus called them "forms"; it
seems only right to point out that erfjord thinks
the passage apocryphal. there is no
heresiologue who does not express shock as he
recounts their wild customs. many histrioni
professed ascetism; some mutilated themselves,
like origen; others lived underground, in the
sewers; others put out their own eyes; still
others (the nebuchadnezzars of nitria) “grazed
on grasses like the oxen, and their hair grew like 
the eagle's." from mortification and severity,
they sometimes graduated to crime; certain
communities tolerated theft; others, homicide;
others, sodomy, incest, and bestiality. all were
blasphemous; they cursed not only the
christian god, but even the arcane deities of
their own pantheon. they plotted together to
write sacred texts, whose disappearance is a
great loss to scholars. in 1658, sir thomas
browne wrote the following: "time has
annihilated the ambitious histrionic gospels,
although not so the insultes with which their
impiousness was scourged"; erfjord has
suggested that those "insultes"(preserved in a
greek codex) are themselves the lost gospels.
unless we recall the histrionic cosmology, such
a suggestion is incomprehensible.
in the hermetic books, it is written that
"things below are as things above, and things
above as things below"; the zohar tells us that
the lower world is a reflection of the higher. the
histrioni founded their doctrine on a
perversion of this idea. they invoked matthew
6:12 ("forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
debtors") and 11:12 ("the kingdom of heaven
suffereth violence") to prove that the earth
influences heaven; they cited i corinthians
13:12 ("for now we see through a glass, darkly")
to prove that all things we see are false.
contaminated perhaps by the monotoni, they
imagined that every man is two men, and that
the real one is the other one, the one in heaven.
they also imagined that our acts cast an
inverted reflection, so that if we are awake, the
other man is asleep; if we fornicate, the other
man is chaste; if we steal, the other man is
generous. when we die, they believed, we shall
join him and be him. (some echo of these
doctrines continues to be heard in bloy.) other
histrioni believed that the world would end
when the number of its possibilities was
exhausted; since there can be no repetitions,
the righteous are duty-bound to eliminate
(commit) the most abominable acts so that
those acts will not sully the future and so that
the coming of the kingdom of jesus may be
hastened.
that particular article of faith was denied by 
other sects, which re-joined that the history of
the world must be acted out in every man. most
men, like pythagoras, will have to transmigrate
through many bodies before obtaining their
liberation; some, the proteans, "within the
period of a single life are lions, dragons, wild
boars, are water and are a tree." demosthenes
tells of the purification by mud to which
initiates were subjected as part of the orphic
mysteries; analogously, the proteans sought
purification through evil. it was their belief, as
it was carpocrates', that no one shall emerge
from the prison until the last obolus is paid
(luke 12:59: "i tell thee, thou shalt not depart
thence, till thou hast paid the very last mite"),
and they often hornswoggled penitents with
this other verse: "i am come that they might
have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly" (john 10:10). they also said that
not to be an evildoer was an act of satanic
arrogance... the histrioni wove many, and
diverse, mythologies; some preached
asceticism, others license—all preached
confusion. theopompus,a histrion from
berenice, denied all fables; he said that every
man is an organ projected by the deity in order
to perceive the world.
the heretics in aurelian's diocese were not
those who claimed that every act is reflected in
heaven but rather those who claimed that time
does not tolerate repetitions. the circumstance
was peculiar; in a report to the authorities at
rome, aurelian mentioned it. the prelate who
received the report was the empress's
confessor; everyone knew that this demanding
minister forbade her the private delectations of
speculative theology. his secretary—formerly
one of john of pannonia's collaborators, now
fallen out with him—was famed as a most
diligent inquisitor of heterodoxies; aurelian
added an explanation of the histrionic heresy,
as it was contained in the conventicles of genoa
and aquileia. he wrote a few paragraphs; when
he tried to write the horrible thesis that no two
moments are the same, his pen halted.
he could not find the necessary words; the
admonitions of the new doctrine were too
affected and metaphorical to be transcribed.
("wouldst thou see what no human eyes have
seen? look upon the moon. wouldst thou hear
what no ears have heard? hearken to the cry of
the bird. wouldst thou touch what no hands
have touched? put thy hand to the earth. truly i
say unto thee, that the moment of god's
creation of the world is yet to come.") then
suddenly a sentence of twenty words came to
his spirit.
with joy he wrote it on the page;
immediately afterward, he was disturbed by the
sense that it was someone else's. the next day,
he remembered: he had read it many years ago
in the adversus annulares, composed by john
of pannonia. he ferreted out the quotation—
there it was. he was torn by uncertainty. to
alter or omit those words was to weaken the
force of the statement; to let them stand was to
plagiarize a man he detested; to indicate the
source was to denounce him. he pleaded for
divine aid. toward the coming of the second
twilight, his guardian angel suggested a middle
way. aurelian kept the words, but set this
disclaimer before it: that which the heresiarchs 
howl today, to the confusion of the faith, was
said during this century, with more levity than
blameworthiness, by a most learned doctor of
the church. then there occurred the thing he
had feared, the thing he had hoped for, the
thing that was inevitable. aurelian was required
to declare the identity of that doctor of the
church; john of pannonia was accused of
professing heretical opinions.
four months later, a blacksmith on the
aventinus, driven to delusions by the
misrepresentations of the histrioni, set a great
iron ball upon the shoulders of his little son so
that the child's double might fly. the man's
child died; the horror engendered by the crime
obliged john's judges to be irreproachably
severe with him. the accused would not retract;
time and again he repeated that to deny his
proposition was to fall into the pestilential
heresy of the monotoni. he did not realize
(perhaps refused to realize) that to speak of the
monotoni was to speak of a thing now
forgotten. with somehow senile insistence, he
poured forth the most brilliant periods of his
old jeremiads; the judges did not even listen to
what had once so shocked them. rather than
try to purify himself of the slightest stain of
histrionism, he redoubled his efforts to prove
that the proposition of which he was accused
was in fact utterly orthodox. he argued with the
men upon whose verdict his very life depended,
and he committed the supreme faux pas of
doing so with genius and with sarcasm. on
october 26, after a debate that had lasted three
days and three nights, he was condemned to be
burned at the stake.
aurelian witnessed the execution, because to
have avoided it would have been to confess
himself responsible for it. the place of
execution was a hill on whose summit stood a
stake pounded deep into the ground; all around
it, bundles of firewood had been gathered. a
priest read the tribunal's verdict.
under the midday sun, john of pannonia lay
with his face in the dust, howling like a beast.
he clawed at the ground, but the executioners
seized him, stripped him, and tied him to the
stake. on his head they put a crown of straw 
sprinkled with sulfur; beside him, a copy of the
pestilential adversus annulâtes. it had rained
the night before, and the wood burned smokily.
john of pannonia prayed in greek, and then in
an unknown language. the pyre was about to
consume him, when aurelian screwed up his
courage to raise his eyes. the fiery gusts fell
still; aurelian saw for the first and last time the
face of the man he hated. it reminded him of
someone, but he couldn't quite remember
whom. then, the flames swallowed him; he
screamed and it was as though the fire itself
were screaming.
plutarch reports that julius caesar wept at
the death of pompey; aurelian did not weep at
the death of john, but he did feel what a man
cured of an incurable disease that had become a
part of his life might feel. in aquileia, in
ephesus, in macedonia, he let the years pass
over him. he sought out the hard ends of the
empire, the floundering swamps and the
contemplative deserts, so that solitude might
help him understand his life. in a mauritanian
cell, in the night laden with lions, he rethought 
the complex accusation against john of
pannonia and for the millionth time he justified
the verdict. it was harder for him to justify his
tortuous denunciation. in rusaddir he
preached that anachronistic sermon titled the
light of lights lighted in the flesh of a
reprobate. in hibernia, in one of the huts of a
monastery besieged by forest, he was surprised
one night, toward dawn, by the sound of rain.
he recalled a roman night when that same
punctilious sound had surprised him. at high
noon, a lighting bolt set the trees afire, and
aurelian died as john had.
the end of the story can only be told in
metaphors, since it takes place in the kingdom
of heaven, where time does not exist. one might
say that aurelian spoke with god and found
that god takes so little interest in religious
differences that he took him for john of
pannonia. that, however, would be to impute
confusion to the divine intelligence. it is more
correct to say that in paradise, aurelian
discovered that in the eyes of the unfathomable 
deity, he and john of pannonia (the orthodox
and the heretic, the abominator and the
abominated, the accuser and the victim) were a
single person.
story of the warrior
and the captive maiden
on page 278 of his book la poesia (bari,
1942), croce, summarizing and shortening a
latin text by the historian paul the deacon, tells
the story of the life of droctulft and quotes his
epitaph; i found myself remarkably moved by
both life and epitaph, and later i came to
understand why. droctulft was a lombard
warrior who during the siege of ravenna
deserted his own army and died defending the
city he had been attacking. the people of
ravenna buried him in a church sanctuary; they
composed an epitaph in which they expressed
their gratitude (contempsitcaros dumnos
amatille parentes) and remarked upon the
singular contrast between the horrific figure of
that barbarian and his simplicity and kindness:
terribilis visu facies sedmente benignus,
longa querobusto pectore barba
fuit1
[
1gibbon also records these lines, in the decline
and fall, chapter xlv ] such is the story of the
life of droctulft, a barbarian who died
defending rome—or such is the fragment of his
story that paul the deacon was able to preserve.
i do not even know when the event occurred,
whether in the mid-sixth century when the
longobards laid waste to the plains of italy or
in the eighth, before ravenna's surrender. let
us imagine (this is not a work of history) that it
was the mid-sixth century.
let us imagine droctulft sub specie
aeternitatis —not the individual droctulft, who
was undoubtedly unique and fathomless (as all
individuals are), but rather the generic "type"
that tradition (the work of memory and
forgetting) has made of him and many others
like him. through a gloomy geography of
swamps and forests, wars bring him from the
shores of the danube or the elba to italy, and
he may not realize that he is going toward the
south, nor know that he is waging war against a
thing called rome. it is possible that his faith is
that of the arians, who hold that the glory of the
son is a mere reflection of the glory of the
father, but it seems more fitting to imagine him
a worshiper of the earth, hertha, whose veiled
idol is borne from hut to hut in a cart pulled by
cattle—or of the gods of war and thunder, who
are crude wooden figures swathed in woven
clothing and laden with coins and bangles. he
comes from the dense forests of the wild boar
and the urus; he is white, courageous, innocent,
cruel, loyal to his captain and his tribe—not to
the universe. wars bring him to ravenna, and
there he sees something he has never seen
before, or never fully seen. he sees daylight and
cypresses and marble. he sees an aggregate that
is multiple yet without disorder; he sees a city,
an organism, composed of statues, temples,
gardens, rooms, tiered seats, amphorae,
capitals and pediments, and regular open
spaces. none of those artifices (i know this)
strikes him as beautiful; they strike him as we
would be struck today by a complex machine
whose purpose we know not but in whose
design we sense an immortal intelligence at
work. perhaps a single arch is enough for him,
with its incomprehensible inscription of eternal
roman letters—he is suddenly blinded and
renewed by the city, that revelation. he knows
that in this city there will be a dog, or a child,
and that he will not even begin to understand it,
but he knows as well that this city is worth more
than his gods and the faith he is sworn to and
all the marshlands of germany. droctulft
deserts his own kind and fights for ravenna. he
dies, and on his gravestone are carved words
that he would not have understood:
contempsit caros dumnos amat ille parentes,
han cpatriam reputans esse, ravenna, suam
droctulft was not a traitor; traitors seldom
inspire reverential epitaphs. he was an
illuminatus, a convert.
after many generations, the longobards who
had heaped blame upon the turncoat did as he 
had done; they became italians, lombards, and
one of their number—aldiger—may have
fathered those who fathered alighieri.... there
are many conjectures one might make about
droctulft's action; mine is the most economical;
if it is not true as fact, it may nevertheless be
true as symbol.
when i read the story of this warrior in
croce's book, i found myself enormously
moved, and i was struck by the sense that i was
recovering, under a different guise, something
that had once been my own.
i fleetingly thought of the mongol horsemen
who had wanted to make china an infinite
pastureland, only to grow old in the cities they
had yearned to destroy; but that was not the
memory i sought. i found it at last—it was a tale
i had heard once from my english
grandmother, who is now dead.
in 1872 my grandfather borges was in charge
of the northern and western borders of buenos
aires province and the southern border of santa
fe. the headquarters was in junin; some four
or five leagues farther on lay the chain of forts; 
beyond that, what was then called "the pampas"
and also "the interior."
one day my grandmother, half in wonder,
half in jest, remarked upon her fate—an
englishwoman torn from her country and her
people and carried to this far end of the earth.
the person to whom she made the remark told
her she wasn't the only one, and months later
pointed out an indian girl slowly crossing the
town square. she was barefoot, and wearing
two red ponchos; the roots of her hair were
blond. a soldier told her that another
englishwoman wanted to talk with her. the
woman nodded; she went into the headquarters
without fear but not without some misgiving.
set in her coppery face painted with fierce
colors, her eyes were that half-hearted blue that
the english call gray. her body was as light as a
deer's; her hands, strong and bony. she had
come in from the wilderness, from "the
interior," and everything seemed too small for
her—the doors, the walls, the furniture.
perhaps for one instant the two women saw
that they were sisters; they were far from their 
beloved island in an incredible land. my
grandmother, enunciating carefully, asked
some question or other; the other woman
replied haltingly, searching for the words and
then repeating them, as though astonished at
the old taste of them. it must have been fifteen
years since she'd spoken her native language,
and it was not easy to recover it. she said she
was from yorkshire, that her parents had
emigrated out to buenos aires, that she had lost
them in an indian raid, that she had been
carried off by the indians, and that now she was
the wife of a minor chieftain—she'd given him
two sons; he was very brave. she said all this
little by little, in a clumsy sort of english
interlarded with words from the araucan or
pampas tongue,* and behind the tale one
caught glimpses of a savage and uncouth life:
tents of horsehide, fires fueled by dung,
celebrations in which the people feasted on
meat singed over the fire or on raw viscera,
stealthy marches at dawn; the raid on the
corrals, the alarm sounded, the plunder, the
battle, the thundering roundup of the stock by 
naked horsemen, polygamy, stench, and magic.
an englishwoman, reduced to such barbarism!
moved by outrage and pity, my grandmother
urged her not to go back. she swore to help her,
swore to rescue her children. the other woman
answered that she was happy, and she returned
that night to the desert. francisco borges was to
die a short time later, in the revolution of '74;
perhaps at that point my grandmother came to
see that other woman, torn like herself from her
own kind and transformed by that implacable
continent, as a monstrous mirror of her own
fate....
every year, that blond-haired indian woman
had come into the pulperías* in junin or fort
lavalle, looking for trinkets and "vices"; after
the conversation with my grandmother, she
never appeared again. but they did see each
other one more time. my grandmother had
gone out hunting; alongside a squalid hut near
the swamplands, a man was slitting a sheep's
throat. as though in a dream, the indian
woman rode by on horseback. she leaped to the
ground and drank up the hot blood. i cannot
say whether she did that because she was no
longer capable of acting in any other way, or as
a challenge, and a sign.
thirteen hundred years and an ocean lie
between the story of the life of the kidnapped
maiden and the story of the life of droctulft.
both, now, are irrecoverable. the figure of the
barbarian who embraced the cause of ravenna,
and the figure of the european woman who
chose the wilderness—they might seem
conflicting, contradictory. but both were
transported by some secret impulse, an impulse
deeper than reason, and both embraced that
impulse that they would not have been able to
explain. it may be that the stories i have told
are one and the same story. the obverse and
reverse of this coin are, in the eyes of god,
identical.
for ulrike von kühlmann
a biography of tadeo isidoro cruz
(1829—1874)
i'm looking for the face i had
before the world was made.
yeats, "the winding stair"
on february 6, 1829, the montoneros*—who
by this time were being hounded by lavalle*—
were marching northward to join lópez'
divisions; they halted at a ranch whose name
they did not know, three or four leagues from
the pergamino. toward dawn, one of the men
had a haunting night-mare: in the gloom of the
large bunkhouse, his confused cry woke the
woman that was sleeping with him. no one
knows what his dream was because the next day
at four o'clock the montoneros were put to rout
by suárez' cavalry* and the pursuit went on for
nine leagues, all the way to the now-dusky
stubble fields, and the man perished in a ditch,
his skull split by a saber from the wars in peru
and brazil. the woman was named isidora
cruz; the son she bore was given the name
tadeo isidoro. 
it is not my purpose to repeat the story of his
life. of the days and nights that composed it, i
am interested in only one; about the rest, i will
recount nothing but that which is essential to
an understanding of that single night. the
adventure is recorded in a very famous book—
that is, in a book whose subject can be all things
to all men (i corinthians 9:22), for it is capable
of virtually inexhaustible repetitions, versions,
perversions. those who have commented upon
the story of tadeo isidoro cruz, and there are
many, stress the influence of the wide plains on
his formation, but gauchos just like to him were
born and died along the forested banks of the
piranha and in the eastern mountain ranges. he
did live in a world of monotonous barbarity—
when he died in 1874 of the black pox, he had
never seen a mountain or a gas jet or a
windmill. or a city: in 1849, he helped drive a
herd of stock from francisco xavier acevedo's
ranch to buenos aires; the drovers went into
the city to empty their purses; cruz, a
distrustful sort, never left the inn in the
neighborhood of the stockyards. he spent many 
days there, taciturn, sleeping on the ground,
sipping his mate, getting up at dawn and lying
down again at orisons. he realized (beyond
words and even beyond understanding) that the
city had nothing to do with him. one of the
peons, drunk, made fun of him. cruz said
nothing in reply, but during the nights on the
return trip, sitting beside the fire, the other
man's mockery continued, so cruz (who had
never shown any anger, or even the slightest
resentment) killed him with a single thrust of
his knife. fleeing, he took refuge in a swamp; a
few nights later, the cry of a crested screamer
warned him that the police had surrounded
him. he tested his knife on a leaf. he took off
his spurs, so they wouldn't get in his way when
the time came—he would fight before he gave
himself up. he was wounded in the forearm, the
shoulder, and the left hand; he gravely
wounded the bravest of the men who'd come to
arrest him. when the blood ran down between
his fingers, he fought more courageously than
ever; toward dawn, made faint by the loss of
blood, he was disarmed. back then, the army
served as the country's prison: cruz was sent to
a small fort on the northern frontier. as a low
private, he took part in the civil wars;
sometimes he fought for his native province,
sometimes against it. on january 23, 1856, at
the cardoso marshes, he was one of the thirty
christian men who, under the command of sgt.
maj. eugenie laprida, battled two hundred
indians.*
he was wounded by a spear in that
engagement.
there are many gaps in his dark and
courageous story. in about 1868, we come
across him again on the pergamino: married or
domesticated, the father of a son, the owner of a
parcel of land. in 1869 he was made sergeant of
the rural police. he had set his past right; at
that point in his life, he should have considered
himself a happy man, though deep down he
wasn't. (in the future, secretly awaiting him,
was one lucid, fundamental night— the night
when he was finally to see his own face, the
night when he was finally to hear his own true
name. once fully understood, that night
encompasses his entire story—or rather, one
incident, one action on that night does, for
actions are the symbol of our selves.) any life,
however long and complicated it may be,
actually consists of a single moment —the
moment when a man knows forever more who
he is. it is said that alexander of macedonia saw
his iron future reflected in the fabulous story of
achilles; charles xii of sweden, in the story of
alexander. it was not a book that revealed that
knowledge to tadeo isidoro cruz, who did not
know how to read; he saw himself in a hand-tohand
cavalry fight and in a man. this is how it
happened:
during the last days of june in the year 1870,
an order came down for the capture of an
outlaw wanted for two murders. the man was a
deserter from the forces on the border under
the command of col. benito machado; in one
drunken spree he had killed a black man in a
whorehouse; in another, a resident of the
district of rojas. the report added that he came
from laguna colorada. it was at laguna
colorada, forty years earlier, that the
montoneros had gathered for the catastrophe
that had left their flesh for birds and dogs;
laguna colorado was where manuel mesa's
career began, before he was executed in the
plaza de la victoria as the snare drums rolled to
drown out the sound of the man's fury*; laguna
colorada was where the unknown man who
fathered cruz had been born, before he died in
a ditch with his skull split by a saber from the
battles in peru and brazil. cruz had forgotten
the name of the place; with a slight but
inexplicable sense of uneasiness he recognized
it.... on horseback, the outlaw, harried by the
soldiers, wove a long labyrinth of turns and
switchbacks, but the soldiers finally cornered
him on the night of july 12. he had gone to
ground in a field of stubble. the darkness was
virtually impenetrable; cruz and his men,
cautiously and on foot, advanced toward the
brush in whose trembling depths the secret
man lurked, or slept. a crested screamer cried;
tadeo isidoro cruz had the sense that he had
lived the moment before. the outlaw stepped
out from his hiding place to fight them. cruz
glimpsed the terrifying apparition—the long
mane of hair and the gray beard seemed to
consume his face. a well-known reason
prevents me from telling the story of that fight;
let me simply recall that the deserter gravely
wounded or killed several of cruz' men. as cruz
was fighting in the darkness (as his body was
fighting in the darkness), he began to
understand. he realized that one destiny is no
better than the next and that every man must
accept the destiny he bears inside himself. he
realized that his sergeant's epaulets and
uniform were hampering him. he realized his
deep-rooted destiny as a wolf, not a gregarious
dog; he realized that the other man was he
himself. day began to dawn on the lawless
plain; cruz threw his cap to the ground, cried
that he was not going to be a party to killing a
brave man, and he began to fight against the
soldiers, alongside the deserter martín fierro.* 
emma zunz
on january 14, 1922, when emma zunz
returned home from the tarbuch & loewenthal
weaving mill, she found a letter at the far end of
the entryway to her building; it had been sent
from brazil, and it informed her that her father
had died. she was misled at first by the stamp
and the envelope; then the unknown
handwriting made her heart flutter. nine or ten
smudgy lines covered almost the entire piece of
paper; emma read that sr. maier had
accidentally ingested an overdose of veronal
and died on the third inst. in the hospital at
bagé.* the letter was signed by a resident of the
rooming house in which her father had lived,
one fein or fain, in rio grande; he could not
have known that he was writing to the dead
man's daughter.
emma dropped the letter. the first thing she
felt was a sinking in her stomach and a
trembling in her knees; then, a sense of blind
guilt, of unreality, of cold, of fear; then, a desire
for this day to be past. 
then immediately she realized that such a
wish was pointless, for her father's death was
the only thing that had happened in the world,
and it would go on happening, endlessly,
forever after. she picked up the piece of paper
and went to her room. furtively, she put it away
for safekeeping in a drawer, as though she
somehow knew what was coming. she may
already have begun to see the things that would
happen next; she was already the person she
was to become.
in the growing darkness, and until the end of
that day, emma wept over the suicide of
manuel maier, who in happier days gone by had
been emanuel zunz. she recalled summer
outings to a small farm near gualeguay,* she
recalled (or tried to recall) her mother, she
recalled the family's little house in lanus* that
had been sold at auction, she recalled the yellow
lozenges of a window, recalled the verdict of
prison, the disgrace, the anonymous letters with
the newspaper article about the "embezzlement
of funds by teller," recalled (and this she
would never forget) that on the last night, her 
father had sworn that the thief was
loewenthal—loewenthal, aaron loewenthal,
formerly the manager of the mill and now one
of its owners. since 1916, emma had kept the
secret. she had revealed it to no one, not even
to elsa urstein, her best friend. perhaps she
shrank from it out of profane incredulity;
perhaps she thought that the secret was the link
between herself and the absent man.
loewenthal didn't know she knew; emma zunz
gleaned from that minuscule fact a sense of
power.
she did not sleep that night, and by the time
first light defined the rectangle of the window,
she had perfected her plan. she tried to make
that day (which seemed interminable to her) be
like every other. in the mill, there were rumors
of a strike; emma declared, as she always did,
that she was opposed to all forms of violence. at
six, when her workday was done, she went with
elsato a women's club that had a gymnasium
and a swimming pool. they joined; she had to
repeat and then spell her name; she had to
applaud the vulgar jokes that accompanied the 
struggle to get it correct. she discussed with
elsa and the younger of the kronfuss girls
which moving picture they would see sunday
evening. and then there was talk of boyfriends;
no one expected emma to have anything to say.
in april she would be nineteen, but men still
inspired in her an almost pathological fear....
home again, she made soup thickened with
manioc flakes and some vegetables, ate early,
went to bed, and forced herself to sleep. thus
passed friday the fifteenth—a day of work,
bustle, and trivia—the day before the day.
on saturday, impatience wakened her.
impatience, not nervousness or second
thoughts—and the remarkable sense of relief
that she had reached this day at last. there was
nothing else for her to plan or picture to herself;
within a few hours she would have come to the
simplicity of the fait accompli. she read in la
prensa that the nordstjärnan, from malmö,
was to weigh anchor that night from pier 3; she
telephoned loewenthal, insinuated that she had
something to tell him, in confidence, about the
strike, and promised to stop by his office at
nightfall. her voice quivered; the quiver
befitted a snitch. no other memorable event
took place that morning. emma worked until
noon and then settled with perla kronfuss and
eisa on the details of their outing on sunday.
she lay down after lunch and with her eyes
closed went over the plan she had conceived.
she reflected that the final step would be less
horrible than the first, and would give her, she
had no doubt of it, the taste of victory, and of
justice. suddenly, alarmed, she leaped out of
bed and ran to the dressing table drawer. she
opened it; under the portrait of milton sills,
where she had left it night before last, she found
pain's letter. no one could have seen it; she
began to read it, and then she tore it up.
to recount with some degree of reality the
events of that evening would be difficult, and
perhaps inappropriate. one characteristic of
hell is its unreality, which might be thought to
mitigate hell's terrors but perhaps makes them
all the worse. how to make plausible an act in
which even she who was to commit it scarcely
believed? how to recover those brief hours of
chaos that emma zunz's memory today
repudiates and confuses? emma lived in
amalgro,* on calle liniers*;we know that that
evening she went down to the docks. on the
infamous paseo de julio* she may have seen
herself multiplied in mirrors, made public by
lights, and stripped naked by hungry eyes—but
it is more reasonable to assume that at first she
simply wandered, unnoticed, through the
indifferent streets.... she stepped into two or
three bars, observed the routine or the
maneuvers of other women. finally she ran into
some men from the nordstjärnan. one of
them, who was quite young, she feared might
inspire in her some hint of tenderness, so she
chose a different one—perhaps a bit shorter
than she, and foul-mouthed—so that there
might be no mitigation of the purity of the
horror. the man led her to a door and then
down a gloomy entryway and then to a tortuous
stairway and then into a vestibule (with
lozenges identical to those of the house in
lanús) and then down a hallway and then to a
door that closed behind them. the most solemn 
of events are outside time—whether because in
the most solemn of events the immediate past is
severed, as it were, from the future or because
the elements that compose those events seem
not to be consecutive.
in that time outside time, in that welter of
disjointed and horrible sensations, did emma
zunz think even once about the death that
inspired the sacrifice? in my view, she thought
about it once, and that was enough to endanger
her desperate goal. she thought (she could not
help thinking) that her father had done to her
mother the horrible thing being done to her
now. she thought it with weak-limbed
astonishment, and then, immediately, took
refuge in vertigo. the man—a swede or finn—
did not speak spanish; he was an instrument
for emma, as she was for him—but she was
used for pleasure, while he was used for justice.
when she was alone, emma did not open her
eyes immediately. on the night table was the
money the man had left. emma sat up and tore
it to shreds, as she had torn up the letter a short
time before. tearing up money is an act of
impiety, like throwing away bread; the minute
she did it, emma wished she hadn't—an act of
pride, and on that day.... foreboding melted
into the sadness of her body, into the revulsion.
sadness and revulsion lay upon emma like
chains, but slowly she got up and began to
dress. the room had no bright colors; the last
light of evening made it all the drearier. she
managed to slip out without being seen. on the
corner she mounted a westbound lacroze* and
following her plan, she sat in the car's
frontmost seat, so that no one would see her
face. perhaps she was comforted to see, in the
banal bustle of the streets, that what had
happened had not polluted everything. she rode
through gloomy, shrinking neighborhoods,
seeing them and forgetting them instantly, and
got off at one of the stops on warnes.*
paradoxically, her weariness turned into a
strength, for it forced her to concentrate on the
details of her mission and masked from her its
true nature and its final purpose.
aaron loewenthal was in the eyes of all an
upright man; in those of his few closest
acquaintances, a miser. he lived above the mill,
alone. living in the run-down slum, he feared
thieves; in the courtyard of the mill there was a
big dog, and in his desk drawer, as everyone
knew, a revolver. the year before, he had
decorously grieved the unexpected death of his
wife—a gauss! who'd brought him an excellent
dowry!—but money was his true passion. with
secret shame, he knew he was not as good at
earning it as at holding on to it. he was quite
religious; he believed he had a secret pact with
the lord—in return for prayers and devotions,
he was exempted from doing good works. bald,
heavyset, dressed in mourning, with his darklensed
pince-nez and blond beard, he was
standing next to the window, awaiting the
confidential report from operator zunz.
he saw her push open the gate (which he had
left ajar on purpose) and cross the gloomy
courtyard. he saw her make a small detour
when the dog (tied up on purpose) barked.
emma's lips were moving, like those of a person
praying under her breath; weary, over and over
they rehearsed the phrases that sr. loewenthal 
would hear before he died.
things didn't happen the way emma zunz
had foreseen. since early the previous morning,
many times she had dreamed that she would
point the firm revolver, force the miserable
wretch to confess his miserable guilt, explain to
him the daring stratagem that would allow
god's justice to triumph over man's.
(it was not out of fear, but because she was
an instrument of that justice, that she herself
intended not to be punished.) then, a single
bullet in the center of his chest would put an
end to loewenthal's life. but things didn't
happen that way.
sitting before aaron loewenthal, emma felt
(more than the urgency to avenge her father)
the urgency to punish the outrage she herself
had suffered. she could not not kill him, after
being so fully and thoroughly dishonored. nor
did she have time to waste on theatrics. sitting
timidly in his office, she begged loewenthal's
pardon, invoked (in her guise as snitch) the
obligations entailed by loyalty, mentioned a few
names, insinuated others, and stopped short, as 
though overcome by fearfulness. her
performance succeeded; loewenthal went out
to get her a glass of water. by the time he
returned from the dining hall, incredulous at
the woman's fluttering perturbation yet full of
solicitude, emma had found the heavy revolver
in the drawer. she pulled the trigger twice.
loewenthal's considerable body crumpled as
though crushed by the explosions and the
smoke; the glass of water shattered; his face
looked at her with astonishment and fury; the
mouth in the face cursed her in spanish and in
yiddish. the filthy words went on and on;
emma had to shoot him again. down in the
courtyard, the dog, chained to his post, began
barking furiously, as a spurt of sudden blood
gushed from the obscene lips and sullied the
beard and clothes. emma began the accusation
she had prepared ("i have avenged my father,
and i shall not be punished ...") but she didn't
finish it, because sr. loewenthal was dead. she
never knew whether he had managed to
understand.
the dog's tyrannical barking reminded her
that she couldn't rest, not yet. she mussed up
the couch, unbuttoned the dead man's suit coat,
removed his spattered pince-nez and left them
on the filing-cabinet.
then she picked up the telephone and
repeated what she was to repeat so many times,
in those and other words: something has
happened, something unbelievable... sr.
loewenthal sent for me on the pretext of the
strike.... he raped me --- i killed him ----the
story was unbelievable, yes—and yet it
convinced everyone, because in substance it
was true.
emma zunz's tone of voice was real, her
shame was real, her hatred was real. the
outrage that had been done to her was real, as
well; all that was false were the circumstances,
the time, and one or two proper names. 
the house of asterion
and the queen gave birth to a son named asterion.
apollodorus, library, ill:i
i know that i am accused of arrogance and
perhaps of misanthropy, and perhaps even of
madness. these accusations (which i shall
punish in due time) are ludicrous. it is true that
i never leave my house, but it is also true that
its doors (whose number is infinite1) by
asterion that stand [
1the original reads
"fourteen," but there is more than enough cause
to conclude that when spoken number stands
for "infinite."] open night and day to men and
also to animals. anyone who wishes to enter
may do so. here, no womanly splendors, no
palatial ostentation shall be found, but only
calm and solitude. here shall be found a house
like none other on the face of the earth. (those
who say there is a similar house in egypt speak
lies.) even my detractors admit that there is not
a single piece of furniture in the house.
another absurd tale is that i, asterion, am a
prisoner. need i repeat that the door stands
open? need i add that there is no lock?
furthermore, one afternoon i did go out into
the streets; if i returned before nightfall, i did
so because of the terrible dread inspired in me
by the faces of the people—colorless faces, as
flat as the palm of one's hand. the sun had
already gone down, but the helpless cry of a
babe and the crude supplications of the masses
were signs that i had been recognized. the
people prayed, fled, fell prostrate before me;
some climbed up onto the stylobate of the
temple of the axes, others gathered stones.
one, i believe, hid in the sea. not for nothing
was my mother a queen; i cannot mix with
commoners, even if my modesty should wish it.
the fact is, i am unique. i am not interested
in what a man can publish abroad to other men;
like the philosopher, i think that nothing can be
communicated by the art of writing. vexatious
and trivial minutiae find no refuge in my spirit,
which has been formed for greatness; i have
never grasped for long the difference between
one letter and another. a certain generous
impatience has prevented me from learning to 
read. sometimes i regret that, because the
nights and the days are long.
of course i do not lack for distractions.
sometimes i run like a charging ram through
the halls of stone until i tumble dizzily to the
ground; sometimes i crouch in the shadow of a
wellhead or at a corner in one of the corridors
and pretend i am being hunted. there are
rooftops from which i can hurl myself until i
am bloody. i can pretend anytime i like that i
am asleep, and lie with my eyes closed and my
breathing heavy. (sometimes i actually fall
asleep; sometimes by the time i open my eyes,
the color of the day has changed.) but of all the
games, the one i like best is pretending that
there is another assertion’s pretend that he has
come to visit me, and i show him around the
house. bowing majestically, i say to him: now
let us return to our previous intersection or let
us go this way, now, out into another
courtyard or i knew that you would like this
rain gutter or now you will see a cistern that
has filled with sand or now you will see how
the cellar forks. sometimes i make a mistake 
and the two of us have a good laugh over it.
it is not just these games i have thought up—
i have also thought a great deal about the
house. each part of the house occurs many
times; any particular place is another place.
there is not one wellhead, one courtyard, one
drinking trough, one manger; there are
fourteen [an infinite number of] mangers,
drinking troughs, courtyards, wellheads. the
house is as big as the world—or rather, it is the
world. nevertheless, by making my way
through every single courtyard with its wellhead
and every single dusty gallery of gray stone, i
have come out onto the street and seen the
temple of the axes and the sea. that sight, i did
not understand until a night vision revealed to
me that there are also fourteen [an infinite
number of] seas and temples. everything exists
many times, fourteen times, but there are two
things in the world that apparently exist but
once—on high, the intricate sun, and below,
asterion. perhaps i have created the stars and
the sun and this huge house, and no longer
remember it. 
every nine years, nine men come into the
house so that i can free them from all evil. i
hear their footsteps or their voices far away in
the galleries of stone, and i run joyously to find
them. the ceremony lasts but a few minutes.
one after another, they fall, without my ever
having to bloody my hands. where they fall,
they remain, and their bodies help distinguish
one gallery from the others. i do not know how
many there have been, but i do know that one
of them predicted as he died that someday my
redeemer would come.
since then, there has been no pain for me in
solitude, because i know that my redeemer
lives, and in the end he will rise and stand
above the dust. if my ear could hear every
sound in the world, i would hear his footsteps. i
hope he takes me to a place with fewer galleries
and fewer doors. what will my redeemer be
like, i wonder. will he be bull or man? could he
possibly be a bull with the face of a man?
or will he be like me?
the morning sun shimmered on the bronze
sword. now there was not a trace of blood left 
on it.
"can you believe it, ariadne?" said theseus.
"the minotaur scarcely defended itself."
for maria mosquera eastman
the other death
about two years ago, i believe it was (i've lost
the letter), gannon wrote me from
gualeguaychu* to announce that he was
sending me a translation, perhaps the first to be
done into spanish, of ralph waldo emerson's
poem "the past"; in a postscript he added that
pedro damián, a man he said he knew i'd
remember, had died a few nights earlier of
pulmonary congestion. he'd been ravaged by
fever, gannon said, and in his delirium had
relived that bloody day at masoller.* the news
struck me as predictable and even trite, because
at nineteen or twenty pedro damián had
followed the banners of aparicio saravia.*the
1904 uprising had caught him unawares on a
ranch in rio negro or paysandu*, where he was
working as a common laborer; damián was
from entre ríos, gualeguay* to be exact, but
where his friends went, he went—just as
spirited and ignorant a fellow as they were. he
fought in the occasional hand-to-hand skirmish
and in that last battle; repatriated in 1905, he
went back (with humble tenacity) to working in
the fields. so far as i am aware, he never left his
province again. he spent his last thirty years on
quite a solitary little farm a league or two from
the ñancay*; it was in that godforsaken place
that i spoke with him one evening in 1942—or
tried to speak with him. he was a man of few
words and little learning. the sound and fury of
masoller were the full extent of his story; it
came as no surprise to me that he had relived
those times as he lay dying... i had learned that
i would never see damián again, and so i tried
to recall him; my visual memory is so bad that
all i could remember was a photograph that
gannon had taken of him. that, too, is not
particularly remarkable, if you consider that i
saw the man himself but once, in early 1942, 
but saw the photograph countless times.
gannon sent me the photo; i've lost it, but
now i've stopped looking for it. i'd be afraid to
find it.
the second episode took place in
montevideo, months later. the fever and
agonizing death of the man from entre ríos
suggested to me a tale of fantasy based on the
defeat at masoller; when i told the plot of the
story to emir rodriguez monegal, he gave me a
letter of introduction to col. dionisio tabares,
who had led the campaign. the colonel received
me after dinner. from his comfortable rocking
chair out in the courtyard, he lovingly and
confusedly recalled the old days. he spoke of
munitions that never arrived and of exhausted
horses, of grimy, sleepy men weaving labyrinths
of marches, and of saravia, who could have
entered montevideo but turned aside "because
gauchos have an aversion to the city," of men
whose throats were slashed through to the
spine,* of a civil war that struck me as more
some outlaw's dream than the collision of two
armies. he talked about illescas, tupambae,
masoller,* and did so with such perfectly
formed periods, and so vividly, that i realized
that he'd told these same stories many times
before—indeed, it all made me fear that behind
his words hardly any memories remained. as he
took a breath, i managed to mention the name
damián.
"damián? pedro damián?" the colonel said.
"he served with me. a little indian-like fellow
the boys called dayman." he began a noisy
laugh, but suddenly cut it off, with real or
pretended discomfort.
it was in another voice that he said that war,
like women, served to test a man—before a man
goes into battle, he said, no man knows who he
truly is. one fellow might think himself a
coward and turn out to be a brave man, or it
might be the other way around, which was what
happened to that poor damián, who swaggered
around the pulperías with his white ribbon*
and then fell apart in masoller.
there was one shoot-out with the zumacos*
where he'd acted like a man, but it was another
thing when the armies squared off and the
cannon started in and every man felt like five
thousand other men had ganged up to kill'im.
poor little mestizo bastard, he'd spent his whole
life dipping sheep, and all of a sudden he'd
gotten himself swept up in that call to defend
the nation....
absurdly, col. tabares' version of the events
embarrassed me. i'd have preferred that they
not have taken place quite that way. out of the
aged damián, a man i'd had a glimpse of on a
single afternoon, and that, many years ago, i
had unwittingly constructed a sort of idol;
tabares' version shattered it. suddenly i
understood damián's reserve and stubborn
solitude; they had been dictated not by
modesty, but by shame. futilely i told myself,
over and over, that a man pursued by an act of
cowardice is more complex and more
interesting than a man who is merely brave.
the gaucho martín fierro, i thought, is less
memorable than lord jim or razumov. yes, but
damián, as a gaucho, had an obligation to be
martín fierro—especially so in the company of
uruguayan gauchos. with respect to what
tabares said and failed to say, i caught the
gamy taste of what was called artiguismo* —
the (perhaps unarguable) awareness that
uruguay is more elemental than our own
country, and therefore wilder... i recall that that
night we said our goodbyes with exaggerated
effusiveness.
that winter, the lack of one or two details for
my tale of fantasy (which stubbornly refused to
find its proper shape) made me return to col.
tabares' house. i found him with another
gentleman of a certain age—dr. juan francisco
amaro, of paysandú, who had also fought in
saravia's uprising. there was talk, predictably
enough, of masoller. amaro told a few
anecdotes and then, slowly, like a man thinking
out loud, he added:
"we stopped for the night on the santa irene
ranch, i remember, and some new men joined
up with us. among them, there was a french
veterinarian who died the day before the battle,
and a sheep shearer, a young kid from entre
ríos, named pedro damián."
i interrupted sharply—"i know," i said, "the 
argentine kid that fell apart under fire."
i stopped; the two men were looking at me
perplexedly.
"i beg your pardon, sir," amaro said, at last.
"pedro damián died as any man might wish to
die. it was about four in the afternoon. the red
infantry* had dug in on the peak of the hill; our
men charged them with lances; damián led the
charge, yelling, and a bullet got him straight in
the chest. he stopped stock-still, finished his
yell, and crumpled, and his body was trampled
under the hooves of the horses.
he was dead, and the final charge at
masoller rolled right over him. such a brave
man, and not yet twenty."
he was undoubtedly talking about another
damián, but something made me ask what the
young mestizo was yelling.
"curses," the colonel said, "which is what you
yell in charges."
"that may be," said amaro, "but he was also
yelling ¡viva urquiza! "*
we fell silent. finally, the colonel murmured:
"not as though he was fighting at masoller, but 
at cagancha or india muerta,* a hundred years
before."
then, honestly perplexed, he added: "i
commanded those troops, and i'd swear that
this is the first time i've heard mention of any
damián."
we could not make him remember.
in buenos aires, another incident was to
make me feel yet again that shiver that the
colonel's forgetfulness had produced in me.
down in the basement of mitchell's english
bookshop, i came upon patricio gannon one
afternoon, standing before the eleven delectable
volumes of the works of emerson. i asked him
how his translation of "the past" was going. he
said he had no plans to translate it; spanish
literature was tedious enough already without
emerson. i reminded him that he had promised
me the translation in the same letter in which
he'd written me the news of damián's death. he
asked who this "damián" was. i told him, but
drew no response. with the beginnings of a
sense of terror i saw that he was looking at me
strangely, so i bluffed my way into a literary
argument about the sort of person who'd
criticize emerson—a poet more complex, more
accomplished, and unquestionably more
remarkable, i contended, than poor edgar allan
poe.
there are several more events i should
record. in april i had a letter from col. dionisio
tabares; he was no longer confused—now he
remembered quite well the entre ríos boy
who'd led the charge at masoller and been
buried by his men that night at the foot of the
hill. in july i passed through gualeguaychú; i
couldn't manage to find damián's run-down
place—nobody remembered him anymore. i
tried to consult the store-keeper, diego abaroa,
who had seen him die; abaroa had passed away
in the fall. i tried to call to mind damián's
features; months later, as i was browsing
through some albums, i realized that the
somber face i had managed to call up was the
face of the famous tenor tamberlick, in the role
of otello.
i pass now to hypotheses. the simplest, but
also the least satisfactory, posits two damiáns—
the coward who died in entre ríos in 1946, and
the brave man who died at masoller in 1904.
the problem with that hypothesis is that it
doesn't explain the truly enigmatic part of it all:
the curious comings and goings of col. tabares'
memory, the forgetfulness that wipes out the
image and even the name of the man that was
remembered such a short time ago. (i do not,
cannot, accept the even simpler hypothesis—
that i might have dreamed the first
remembering.) more curious yet is the
supernatural explanation offered by ulrike von
kühlmann. pedro damián, ulrike suggests,
died in the battle, and at the hour of his death
prayed to god to return him to entre ríos. god
hesitated a second before granting that favor,
and the man who had asked it was already
dead, and some men had seen him killed. god,
who cannot change the past, although he can
change the images of the past, changed the
image of death into one of unconsciousness,
and the shade of the man from entre ríos
returned to his native land. returned, but we
should recall that he was a shade, a ghost. he 
lived in solitude, without wife, without friends;
he loved everything, possessed everything, but
from a distance, as though from the other side
of a pane of glass; he "died," but his gossamer
image endured, like water within water. that
hypothesis is not correct, but it ought to have
suggested the true one (the one that today i
believe to be the true one), which is both
simpler and more outrageous. i discovered it
almost magically in pier damiani's treatise
titled de omnipotentia, which i sought out
because of two lines from canto xxi of the
paradiso— two lines that deal with a problem
of identity. in the fifth chapter of his treatise,
pier damien maintains, against aristotle and
fredegarius of tours, that god can make what
once existed never to have been. i read those
old theological arguments and began to
understand the tragic story of don pedro
damián. this is the way i imagine it:
damián behaved like a coward on the field of
masoller, and he dedicated his life to correcting
that shameful moment of weakness. he
returned to entre ríos; he raised his hand
against no man, he "marked" no one,* he
sought no reputation for bravery, but in the
fields of ñancay, dealing with the brushy
wilderness and the skittish livestock, he
hardened himself. little by little he was
preparing himself, unwittingly, for the miracle.
deep inside himself, he thought: if fate brings
me another battle, i will know how to deserve it.
for forty years he awaited that battle with
vague hopefulness, and fate at last brought it to
him, at the hour of his death. it brought it in the
form of a delirium, but long ago the greeks
knew that we are the shadows of a dream. in his
dying agony, he relived his battle, and he
acquitted himself like a man — he led the final
charge and took a bullet in the chest. thus, in
1946, by the grace of his long-held passion,
pedro damián died in the defeat at masoller,
which took place between the winter and spring
of the year 1904. the summa theologica denies
that god can undo, unmake what once existed,
but it says nothing about the tangled
concatenation of causes and effects — which is
so vast and so secret that it is possible that not a 
single remote event can be annulled, no matter
how insignificant, without canceling the
present. to change the past is not to change a
mere single event; it is to annul all its
consequences, which tend to infinity. in other
words: it is to create two histories of the world.
in what we might call the first, pedro damián
died in entre ríos in 1946; in the second, he
died at masoller in 1904. this latter history is
the one we are living in now, but the
suppression of the former one was not
immediate, and it produced the inconsistencies
i have reported. in col. dionisio tabares we can
see the various stages of this process: at first he
remembered that damián behaved like a
coward; then he totally forgot him; then he
recalled his impetuous death. the case of the
storekeeper abaroa is no less instructive; he
died, in my view, because he had too many
memories of don pedro damián.
as for myself, i don't think i run a similar
risk. i have guessed at and recorded a process
inaccessible to humankind, a sort of outrage to
rationality; but there are circumstances that
mitigate that awesome privilege. for the
moment, i am not certain that i have always
written the truth. i suspect that within my tale
there are false recollections. i suspect that
pedro damián (if he ever existed) was not
called pedro damián, and that i remember him
under that name in order to be able to believe,
someday in the future, that his story was
suggested to me by the arguments of pier
damiani. much the same thing occurs with that
poem that i mentioned in the first paragraph,
the poem whose subject is the irrevocability of
the past. in 1951 or thereabouts i will recall
having concocted a tale of fantasy, but i will
have told the story of a true event in much the
way that naive virgil, two thousand years ago,
thought he was heralding the birth of a man
though he had foretold the birth of god.
poor damián! death carried him off at
twenty in a war he knew nothing of and in a
homemade sort of battle—yet though it took
him a very long time to do so, he did at last
achieve his heart's desire, and there is perhaps
no greater happiness than that. 
deutsches requiem
though he slay me, yet will i trust in him.
job 13:15
my name is otto dietrich zur linde. one of
my forebears, christoph zur linde, died in the
cavalry charge that decided the victory of
zorndorf. during the last days of 1870, my
maternal great-grandfather, ulrich forkel, was
killed in the marchenoir forest by french
sharpshooters; captain dietrich zur linde, my
father, distinguished himself in 1914 at the siege
of namur, and again two years later in the
crossing of the danube.1
it is significant that zur linde has omitted
his most illustrious forebear, the theologian and
hebraist johannes forkel (1799-1846), who
applied hegel's dialectics to christology and
whose literal translation of some of the
apocrypha earned him the censure of
hengstenberg and the praise of thilo and
gesenius.[ed.]
as for myself, i am to be shot as a torturer
and a murderer. the court has acted rightly;
from the first, i have confessed my guilt.
tomorrow, by the time the prison clock strikes
nine, i shall have entered the realms of death; it
is natural that i should think of my elders, since
i am come so near their shadow—since,
somehow, i am they.
during the trial (which fortunately was
short) i did not speak; to explain myself at that
point would have put obstacles in the way of the
verdict and made me appear cowardly. now
things have changed; on this night that
precedes my execution, i can speak without
fear. i have no desire to be pardoned, for i feel
no guilt, but i do wish to be understood. those
who heed my words shall understand the
history of germany and the future history of the
world. i know that cases such as mine,
exceptional and shocking now, will very soon be
unremarkable. tomorrow i shall die, but i am a
symbol of the generations to come. 
i was born in marienburg in 1908. two
passions, music and metaphysics, now almost
forgotten, allowed me to face many terrible
years with bravery and even happiness. i cannot
list all my benefactors, but there are two names
i cannot allow myself to omit: brahms and
schopenhauer. frequently, i also repaired to
poetry; to those two names, then, i would add
another colossal germanic name: william
shakespeare. early on, theology had held some
interest for me, but i was forever turned from
that fantastic discipline (and from christianity)
by schopenhauer with his direct arguments and
shakespeare and brahms with the infinite
variety of their worlds. i wish anyone who is
held in awe and wonder, quivering with
tenderness and gratitude, transfixed by some
passage in the work of these blessed men—
anyone so touched—to know that i too was once
transfixed like them—i the abominable.
nietzsche and spengler entered my life in
1927. a certain eighteenth-century author
observes that no man wants to owe anything to
his contemporaries; in order to free myself from 
an influence that i sensed to be oppressive, i
wrote an article titled "abrechnung mit
spengler," wherein i pointed out that the most
unequivocal monument to those characteristics
that the author called faustian was not goethe's
miscellaneous drama2 [2other nations live
naively, in and for themselves, like minerals or
meteors; germany is the universal mirror that
receives all others—the conscience of the world
(das welt bewußt sein). goethe is the
prototype of that ecumenical mind. i do not
criticize him, but i do not see him as the
faustian man of spengler's treatise.] but rather
a poem written twenty centuries ago, the de
rerum natures* i did, however, give just due to
the sincerity of our philosopher of history, his
radically german (kerndeutsch) and military
spirit. in 1929 i joined the party.
i shall say little about my years of
apprenticeship. they were harder for me than
for many others, for in spite of the fact that i
did not lack valor, i felt no calling for violence. i
did, however, realize that we were on the
threshold of a new age, and that that new age, 
like the first years of islam or christianity,
demanded new men. as individuals, my
comrades were odious to me; i strove in vain to
convince myself that for the high cause that had
brought us all together, we were not
individuals.
theologians claim that if the lord's attention
were to stray for even one second from my right
hand, which is now writing, that hand would be
plunged into nothingness, as though it had been
annihilated by a lightless fire. no one can exist,
say i, no one can sip a glass of water or cut off a
piece of bread, without justification. that
justification is different for every man; i
awaited the inexorable war that would test our
faith. it was enough for me to know that i would
be a soldier in its battles. i once feared that we
would be disappointed by the cowardice of
england and russia. chance (or destiny) wove a
different future for me—on march 1, 1939, at
nightfall, there were riots in tilsit, which the
newspapers did not report; in the street behind
the synagogue, two bullets pierced my leg, and
it had to be amputated3. [3 it is rumored that 
the wound had extremely serious
consequences.[ed.]]
days later, our armies entered bohemia;
when the sirens announced the news, i was in
that sedentary hospital, trying to lose myself,
forget myself, in the books of schopenhauer. on
the windowsill slept a massive, obese cat—the
symbol of my vain destiny.
in the first volume of parergaund
paralipomena, i read once more that all things
that can occur to a man, from the moment of
his birth to the moment of his death, have been
predetermined by him. thus, all inadvertence is
deliberate, every casual encounter is an
engagement made beforehand, every
humiliation is an act of penitence, every failure
a mysterious victory, every death a suicide.
there is no more cunning consolation than the
thought that we have chosen our own
misfortunes; that individual theology reveals a
secret order, and in a marvelous way confuses
ourselves with the deity. what unknown
purpose (i thought) had made me seek out that
evening, those bullets, this mutilation? not the 
fear of war—i knew that; something deeper. at
last i believed i understood. to die for a religion
is simpler than living that religion fully; battling
savage beasts in ephesus is less difficult
(thousands of obscure martyrs did it) than
being paul, the servant of jesus christ; a single
act is quicker than all the hours of a man. the
battle and the glory are easy; raskolnikov's
undertaking was more difficult than
napoleon's. on february 7, 1941, i was made
subdirector of the tarnowitz concentration
camp.
carrying out the duties attendant on that
position was not something i enjoyed, but i
never sinned by omission. the coward proves
himself among swords; the merciful man, the
compassionate man, seeks to be tested by jails
and others' pain. nazism is intrinsically a moral
act, a stripping away of the old man, which is
corrupt and depraved, in order to put on the
new. in battle, amid the captains' outcries and
the shouting, such a transformation is common;
it is not common in a crude dungeon, where
insidious compassion tempts us with ancient
acts of tenderness. i do not write that word
"compassion" lightly: compassion on the part of
the superior man is zarathustra's ultimate sin. i
myself (i confess) almost committed it when the
famous poet david jerusalem was sent to us
from breslau.
jerusalem was a man of fifty; poor in the
things of this world, persecuted, denied,
calumniated, he had consecrated his genius to
hymns of happiness. i think i recall that in the
dichtung der zeit, albert sörgel compared him
to whitman. it is not a happy comparison:
whitman celebrates the universe a priori, in a
way that is general and virtually indifferent;
jerusalem takes delight in every smallest thing,
with meticulous and painstaking love. he never
stoops to enumerations, catalogs. i can still
recite many hexameters from that profound
poem titled "tse yang, painter of tigers," which
is virtually striped with tigers, piled high with
transversal, silent tigers, riddled through and
through with tigers. nor shall i ever forget the
soliloquy "rosenkranz talks with the angel," in
which a sixteenth-century london moneylender 
tries in vain, as he is dying, to exculpate
himself, never suspecting that the secret
justification for his life is that he has inspired
one of his clients (who has seen him only once,
and has no memory even of that) to create the
character shylock. a man of memorable eyes,
sallow skin, and a beard that was almost black,
david jerusalem was the prototypical
sephardic jew, although he belonged to the
depraved and hated ashkenazim. i was severe
with him; i let neither compassion nor his fame
make me soft. i had realized many years before
i met david jerusalem that everything in the
world can be the seed of a possible hell; a face, a
word, a compass, an advertisement for
cigarettes—anything can drive a person insane
if that person cannot manage to put it out of his
mind. wouldn't a man be mad if he constantly
had before his mind's eye the map of hungary?
i decided to apply this principle to the
disciplinary regimen of our house, and— 4 [4
here, the excision of a number of lines has been
unavoidable.[ed.]]
in late 1942, jerusalem went insane; on
march 1, 1943, he succeeded in killing himself.5
[
5 in neither the files nor the published work of
sörgel does jerusalem's name appear. nor does
one find it in the histories of german literature.
i do not, however, think that this is an invented
figure. many jewish intellectuals were tortured
in tarnowitz on the orders of otto dietrich zur
linde, among them the pianist emma
rosenzweig. "david jerusalem" is perhaps a
symbol for many individuals. we are told that
he died on march ï, 1943; on march ï, 1939, the
narrator had been wounded at tilsit.[ed.]
i do not know whether jerusalem
understood that if i destroyed him, it was in
order to destroy my own compassion. in my
eyes, he was not a man, not even a jew; he had
become a symbol of a detested region of my
soul. i suffered with him, i died with him, i
somehow have been lost with him; that was why
i was implacable.
meanwhile, the grand days and grand nights
of a thrilling war washed over us. in the air we
breathed there was an emotion that resembled
love. as though the ocean were suddenly
nearby, there was a tonic and an exultation in
the blood. in those years, everything was
different—even the taste of one's sleep. (i may
never have been happy, but it is common
knowledge that misery requires paradises lost.)
there is no man who does not long for
plenitude—the sum of the experiences of which
a man is capable; there is no man who does not
fear being defrauded of a part of that infinite
inheritance. but my generation has had it all,
for first it was given glory, and then defeat.
in october or november of 1942, my brother
friedrich died in the second battle of el
alamein, on the egyptian sands; months later,
an aerial bombardment destroyed the house we
had been born in; another, in late 1943,
destroyed my laboratory. hounded across vast
continents, the third reich was dying; its hand
was against all men, and all men's hands
against it. then, something remarkable
happened, and now i think i understand it. i
believed myself capable of drinking dry the cup
of wrath, but when i came to the dregs i was
stopped by an unexpected flavor—the 
mysterious and almost horrific taste of
happiness. i tested several explanations; none
satisfied me. i feel a contentment in defeat, i
reflected, because secretly i know my own
guilt, and only punishment can redeem me.
then i feel a contentment in defeat, i reflected,
simply because defeat has come, because it is
infinitely connected to all the acts that are, that
were, and that shall be, because to censure or
deplore a single real act is to blaspheme
against the universe. i tested those arguments,
as i say, and at last i came to the true one.
it has been said that all men are born either
aristotelians or platonists. that is equivalent to
saying that there is no debate of an abstract
nature that is not an instance of the debate
between aristotle and plato.
down through the centuries and latitudes,
the names change, the dialects, the faces, but
not the eternal antagonists. likewise, the
history of nations records a secret continuity.
when arminius slaughtered the legions of
varus in a swamp, when he slashed their
throats, he did not know that he was a
forerunner of a german empire; luther, the
translator of the bible, never suspected that his
destiny would be to forge a nation that would
destroy the bible forever; christoph zur linde,
killed by a muscovite bullet in 1758, somehow
set the stage for the victories of 1914; hitler
thought he was fighting for a nation, but he was
fighting for all nations, even for those he
attacked and abominated. it does not matter
that his ego was unaware of that; his blood, his
will, knew. the world was dying of judaism,
and of that disease of judaism that is belief in
christ; we proffered it violence and faith in the
sword. that sword killed us, and we are like the
wizard who weaves a labyrinth and is forced to
wander through it till the end of his days, or like
david, who sits in judgment on a stranger and
sentences him to death, and then hears the
revelation: thou art that man. there are many
things that must be destroyed in order to build
the new order; now we know that germany was
one of them. we have given something more
than our lives; we have given the life of our
beloved nation. let others curse and others
weep; i rejoice in the fact that our gift is
orbicular and perfect.
now an implacable age looms over the world.
we forged that age, we who are now its victim.
what does it matter that england is the
hammer and we the anvil? what matters is that
violence, not servile christian acts of timidity,
now rules. if victory and injustice and
happiness do not belong to germany, let them
belong to other nations. let heaven exist,
though our place be in hell.
i look at my face in the mirror in order to
know who i am, in order to know how i shall
comport myself within a few hours, when i face
the end. my flesh may feel fear; i myself do not.
averroës' search
s'imaginant que la tragédie n'est autre chose
que l'art de louer....
ernest renan, averroès, 48 (1861) 
abu-al-walîd muhammad ibn-ahmad ibnrushd
(it would take that long name, passing
through "benraist" and "avenris" and even
"aben rassad" and "filius rosadis," a hundred
years to become "averroës") was at work on the
eleventh chapter of his work tahãfutal-tahafut
("destruction of the destruction"), which
maintains, contrary to the persian ascetic alghazzali,
author of the tahãfutal-falãsifah
("destruction of philosophers"), that the deity
knows only the general laws of the universe,
those that apply not to the individual but to the
species. he wrote with slow assurance, from
right to left; the shaping of syllogisms and
linking together of vast paragraphs did not keep
him from feeling, like a sense of wonderful wellbeing,
the cool, deep house around him. in the
depths of the siesta, loving turtledoves purred
throatily, one to another; from some invisible
courtyard came the murmur of a fountain;
something in the flesh of averroës, whose
ancestors had come from the deserts of arabia,
was grateful for the steadfast presence of the
water. below lay the gardens of flowers and of 
foodstuffs; below that ran the bustling
guadalquivir; beyond the river spread the
beloved city of córdoba, as bright as baghdad
or cairo, like a complex and delicate
instrument; and, encircling córdoba (this,
averroës could feel too), extending to the very
frontier, stretched the land of spain, where
there were not a great many things, yet where
each thing seemed to exist materially and
eternally. his quill ran across the page, the
arguments, irrefutable, knitted together, and
yet a small worry clouded averroës' happiness.
not the sort of worry brought on by the
tahãfut, which was a fortuitous enterprise, but
rather a philological problem connected with
the monumental work that would justify him to
all people—his commentary on aristotle. that
greek sage, the fountainhead of all philosophy,
had been sent down to men to teach them all
things that can be known; interpreting
aristotle's works, in the same way the ulemas
interpret the qur'an, was the hard task that
averroës had set himself. history will record
few things lovelier and more moving than this
arab physician's devotion to the thoughts of a
man separated from him by a gulf of fourteen
centuries. to the intrinsic difficulties of the
enterprise we might add that averroës, who
knew neither syriac nor greek, was working
from a translation of a translation.
the night before, two doubtful words had
halted him at the very portals of the poetics.
those words were "tragedy" and "comedy." he
had come across them years earlier, in the third
book of the rhetoric; no one in all of islam
could hazard a guess as to their meaning. he
had pored through the pages of alexander of
aphrodisias, compared the translations of the
nestorian hunayn ibn-ishaq and abu-bashãr
mata—and he had found nothing. yet the two
arcane words were everywhere in the text of the
poetics—it was impossible to avoid them.
averroës laid down his quill. he told himself
(without conviction) that what we seek is often
near at hand, put away the manuscript of the
tahãfut, and went to the shelf on which the
many volumes of blind ibn-sina's moqqãm,
copied by persian copyists, stood neatly aligned. 
of course he had already consulted them, but
he was tempted by the idle pleasure of turning
their pages. he was distracted from that
scholarly distraction by a kind of song. he
looked out through the bars of the balcony;
there below, in the narrow earthen courtyard,
half-naked children were at play. one of them,
standing on the shoulders of another, was
clearly playing at being a muezzin: his eyes
tightly closed, he was chanting the muezzin's
monotonous cry, there is no god but allah.
the boy standing motionless and holding him
on his shoulders was the turret from which he
sang; another, kneeling, bowing low in the dirt,
was the congregation of the faithful. the game
did not last long—they all wanted to be the
muezzin, no one wanted to be the worshippers
or the minaret. averroës listened to them
arguing in the "vulgar" dialect (that is, the
incipient spanish) of the muslim masses of the
peninsula. he opened khalil's kitãbal-'ayn and
thought proudly that in all of córdoba (perhaps
in all of al-andalus) there was no other copy of
the perfect work—only this one, sent him by
emir ya'qübal-mansur from tangier. the name
of that port reminded him that the traveler abual-hasan
al-ash'ari, who had returned from
morocco, was to dine with him that evening at
the home of the qur'anist faraj. abu-al-hasan
claimed to have reached the kingdoms of the
sin empire [china]; with that peculiar logic
born of hatred, his detractors swore that he had
never set foot in china and that he had
blasphemed allah in the temples of that land.
the gathering would inevitably last for hours;
averroës hurriedly went back to his work on the
tahãfut. he worked until dusk.
at faraj's house, the conversation moved
from the incomparable virtues of the governor
to those of his brother the emir; then, out in the
garden, the talk was of roses. abu-al-hasan
(having never seen them) said there were no
roses like those which bedeck the villas of
andalusia. faraj was not to be suborned by
flattery; he observed that the learned ibnqutaybah
had described a superb variety of
perpetual rose which grows in the gardens of
hindustan and whose petals, of a deep crimson 
red, exhibit characters reading there is no god
but allah, and muhammad is his prophet. he
added that abu-al-hasan must surely be
acquainted with those roses. abu-al-hasan
looked at him in alarm. if he said yes, he would
be judged by all, quite rightly, to be the most
pliable and serviceable of impostors; if he said
no, he would be judged an infidel. he opted to
breathe that allah held the keys that unlock
hidden things, and that there was no green or
wilted thing on earth that was not recorded in
his book. those words belong to one of the first
suras of the qur'an; they were received with a
reverential murmur. puffed up by that victory
of dialectics, abu-al-hasan was about to declare
that allah is perfect in his works, and
inscrutable. but averroës, prefiguring the
distant arguments of a still-problematic hume,
interrupted.
"i find it less difficult to accept an error in
the learned ibn-qutaybah, or in the copyists,"
he said, "than to accept that the earth brings
forth roses with the profession of our faith."
"precisely. great words and true," said abu-
al-hasan.
"some traveler, i recall," mused the poet
abd-al-malik, "speaks of a tree whose branches
put forth green birds. i am pained less by
believing in that tree than in roses adorned with
letters."
"the birds' color," said averroës, "does seem
to make that wonder easier to bear. in addition,
both birds and the fruit of trees belong to the
natural world, while writing is an art. to move
from leaves to birds is easier than to move from
roses to letters."
another guest indignantly denied that
writing was an art, since the original book of
the qur'an— the mother of the book— predates
the creation, and resides in heaven. another
spoke of al-jahiz of basra, who had stated that
the qur'an is a substance that can take the form
of man or animal—an opinion which appears to
agree with that of the people who attribute to
the qur'an two faces. faraj discoursed long on
orthodox doctrine. the qur'an, he said, is one
of the attributes of allah, even as his mercy is;
it may be copied in a book, pronounced with the 
tongue, or remembered in the heart, but while
language and signs and writing are the work of
men, the qur'an itself is irrevocable and eternal.
averroës, who had written his commentary on
the republic, might have said that the mother
of the book is similar, in a way, to the platonic
idea, but he could see that theology was one
subject utterly beyond the grasp of abu-alhasan.

others, who had come to the same
realization, urged abu-al-hasan to tell a tale of
wonder. then, like now, the world was horrible;
daring men might wander through it, but so
might wretches, those who fall down in the dust
before all things. abu-al-hasan's memory was a
mirror of secret acts of cowardice.
what story could he tell? besides, the guests
demanded marvels, while the marvelous was
perhaps incommunicable: the moon of bengal
is not the same as the moon of yemen, but it
deigns to be described with the same words.
abu-al-hasan pondered; then, he spoke:
"he who wanders through climes and cities,"
his unctuous voice began, "sees many things
worthy of belief. this, for instance, which i have
told but once before, to the king of the turks. it
took place in sin-i kalal [canton], where the
river of the water of life spills into the sea."
faraj asked whether the city lay many
leagues from that wall erected by iskandar dhual-quarnayn
[alexander of macedonia] to halt
the advance of gog and magog.
"there are vast deserts between them," abual-hasan
said, with inadvertent haughtiness.
"forty days must a kafila [caravan] travel
before catching sight of its towers, and another
forty, men say, before the kafila stands before
them. in sin-i kalal i know of no man who has
seen it or seen the man who has seen it."
for one moment the fear of the grossly
infinite, of mere space, mere matter, laid its
hand on averroës. he looked at the
symmetrical garden; he realized that he was
old, useless, unreal. then abu-al-hasan spoke
again:
"one evening, the muslim merchants of sin-i
kalal conducted me to a house of painted wood
in which many persons lived. it is not possible 
to describe that house, which was more like a
single room, with rows of cabinet-like
contrivances, or balconies, one atop another. in
these niches there were people eating and
drinking; there were people sitting on the floor
as well, and also on a raised terrace. the people
on this terrace were playing the tambour and
the lute—all, that is, save some fifteen or twenty
who wore crimson masks and prayed and sang
and conversed among themselves. these
masked ones suffered imprisonment, but no
one could see the jail; they rode upon horses,
but the horse was not to be seen; they waged
battle, but the swords were of bamboo; they
died, and then they walked again."
"the acts of madmen," said faraj, "are
beyond that which a sane man can envision."
"they were not madmen," abu-al-hasan had
to explain. "they were, a merchant told me,
presenting a story."
no one understood, no one seemed to want
to understand. abu-al-hasan, in some
confusion, swerved from the tale he had been
telling them into inept explanation. aiding
himself with his hands, he said:
"let us imagine that someone shows a story
instead of telling it—the story of the seven
sleepers of ephesus, say.* we see them retire
into the cavern, we see them pray and sleep, we
see them sleep with their eyes open, we see
them grow while they are asleep, we see them
awaken after three hundred nine years, we see
them hand the merchant an ancient coin, we
see them awaken in paradise, we see them
awaken with the dog. it was something like that
that the persons on the terrace showed us that
evening."
"did these persons speak?" asked faraj.
"of course they did," said abu-al-hasan, now
become the apologist for a performance that he
only barely recalled and that had irritated him
considerably at the time. "they spoke and sang
and gave long boring speeches!"
"in that case," said faraj, "there was no need
for twenty persons. a single speaker could tell
anything, no matter how complex it might be."
to that verdict, they all gave their nod. they
extolled the virtues of arabic—the language
used by allah, they recalled, when he instructs
the angels—and then the poetry of the arabs.
after according that poetry its due praise, abual-hasan
dismissed those other poets who,
writing in córdoba or damascus, clung to
pastoral images and bedouin vocabulary—
outmoded, he called them. he said it was
absurd for a man whose eyes beheld the wide
guadalquivir to compose odes upon the water
of a well. it was time, he argued, that the old
metaphors be renewed; back when zuhayr
compared fate to a blind camel, he said, the
figure was arresting—but five hundred years of
admiration had worn it very thin. to that
verdict, which they had all heard many times
before, from many mouths, they all likewise
gave their nod. averroës, however, kept silent.
at last he spoke, not so much to the others as to
himself.
"less eloquently," he said, "and yet with
similar arguments, i myself have sometimes
defended the proposition argued now by abu-alhasan.
in alexandria there is a saying that only
the man who has already committed a crime
and repented of it is incapable of that crime; to
be free of an erroneous opinion, i myself might
add, one must at some time have professed it.
in his mu'allaqa, zuhayr says that in the
course of his eighty years of pain and glory
many is the time he has seen destiny trample
men, like an old blind camel; abu-al-hasan says
that that figure no longer makes us marvel. one
might reply to that objection in many ways.
first, that if the purpose of the poem were to
astound, its life would be not measured in
centuries but in days, or hours, or perhaps even
minutes. second, that a famous poet is less an
inventor than a discoverer. in praise of ibnsharaf
of berkha, it has many times been said
that only he was capable of imagining that the
stars of the morning sky fall gently, like leaves
falling from the trees; if that were true, it would
prove only that the image is trivial. the image
that only a single man can shape is an image
that interests no man. there are infinite things
upon the earth; any one of them can be
compared to any other. comparing stars to
leaves is no less arbitrary than comparing them 
to fish, or birds. on the other hand, every man
has surely felt at some moment in his life that
destiny is powerful yet clumsy, innocent yet
inhuman. it was in order to record that feeling,
which may be fleeting or constant but which no
man may escape experiencing, that zuhayr's
line was written. no one will ever say better
what zuhayr said there. furthermore (and this
is perhaps the essential point of my reflections),
time, which ravages fortresses and great cities,
only enriches poetry. at the time it was
composed by him in arabia, zuhayr's poetry
served to bring together two images—that of the
old camel and that of destiny; repeated today, it
serves to recall zuhayr and to conflate our own
tribulations with those of that dead arab. the
figure had two terms; today, it has four. time
widens the circle of the verses, and i myself
know some verses that are, like music, all things
to all men. thus it was that many years ago, in
marrakesh, tortured by memories of córdoba, i
soothed myself by repeating the apostrophe
which abd-al-rahman spoke in the gardens of
al-rusayfah to an african palm: 
thou too art, oh palm!
on this foreign soil...
"a remarkable gift, the gift bestowed by
poetry—words written by a king homesick for
the orient served to comfort me when i was far
away in africa, homesick for spain."
then averroës spoke of the first poets, those
who in the time of ignorance, before islam, had
already said all things in the infinite language of
the deserts. alarmed (and not without reason)
by the inane versifications of ibn-sharaf, he said
that in the ancients and the qur'an could all
poetry be read, and he condemned as illiterate
and vain all desire to innovate. the others
listened with pleasure, for he was vindicating
that which was old.
muezzins were calling the faithful to the
prayer of first light when averroës entered his
library again. (in the harem, the black-haired
slave girls had tortured a red-haired slave girl,
but averroës was not to know that until
evening.) something had revealed to him the
meaning of the two obscure words. with firm,
painstaking calligraphy, he added these lines to
the manuscript: aristu [aristotle] gives the
name "tragedy" to panegyrics and the name
"comedy" to satires and anathemas. there are
many admirable tragedies and comedies in the
qur'an and the mu'allaqat of the mosque.
he felt sleep coming upon him, he felt a chill.
his turban unwound, he looked at himself in a
metal mirror.
i do not know what his eyes beheld, for no
historian has described the forms of his face. i
know that he suddenly disappeared, as though
annihilated by a fire without light, and that with
him disappeared the house and the unseen
fountain and the books and the manuscripts
and the turtledoves and the many black-haired
slave girls and the trembling red-haired slave
girl and faraj and abu-al-hasan and the
rosebushes and perhaps even the guadalquivir.
in the preceding tale, i have tried to narrate
the process of failure, the process of defeat. i
thought first of that archbishop of canterbury
who set himself the task of proving that god
exists; then i thought of the alchemists who
sought the philosopher's stone; then, of the vain
trisectors of the angle and squarers of the circle.
then i reflected that a more poetic case than
these would be a man who sets himself a goal
that is not forbidden to other men, but is
forbidden to him. i recalled averroës, who,
bounded within the circle of islam, could never
know the meaning of the words tragedy and
comedy. i told his story; as i went on, i felt
what that god mentioned by bur-ton must have
felt—the god who set himself the task of
creating a bull but turned out a buffalo. i felt
that the work mocked me, foiled me, thwarted
me. i felt that averroës, trying to imagine what
a play is without ever having suspected what a
theater is, was no more absurd than i, trying to
imagine averroës yet with no more material
than a few snatches from renan, lane, and
asín palacios.i felt, on the last page, that my
story was a symbol of the man i had been as i
was writing it, and that in order to write that
story i had had to be that man, and that in
order to be that man i had had to write that
story, and so on, ad infinitum. (and just when i 
stop believing in him, "averroës" disappears.)
the zahir
in buenos aires the zahir is a common
twenty-centavo coin into which a razor or letter
opener has scratched the letter n t and the
number 2; the date stamped on the face is
1929. (in gujarat, at the end of the eighteenth
century, the zahir was a tiger; in java it was a
blind man in the surakarta mosque, stoned by
the faithful; in persia, an astrolabe that nadir
shah ordered thrown into the sea; in the
prisons of mahdi, in 1892, a small sailor's
compass, wrapped in a shred of cloth from a
turban, that rudolf karl von slatin touched; in
the synagogue in córdoba, according to
zotenberg, a vein in the marble of one of the
twelve hundred pillars; in the ghetto in tetuán,
the bottom of a well.) today is the thirteenth of
november; last june 7, at dawn, the zahir came
into my hands; i am not the man i was then,
but i am still able to recall, and perhaps
recount, what happened. i am still, albeit only
partially, borges.
on june 6, teodelina villar died. back in
1930, photographs of her had littered the pages
of worldly magazines; that ubiquity may have
had some-thing to do with the fact that she was
thought to be a very pretty woman, al-though
that supposition was not unconditionally
supported by every image of her. but no
matter—teodelina villar was less concerned
with beauty than with perfection. the jews and
chinese codified every human situation: the
mishnah tells us that beginning at sunset on the
sabbath, a tailor may not go into the street
carrying a needle; the book of rites informs us
that a guest receiving his first glass of wine
must assume a grave demeanor; receiving the
second, a respectful, happy air. the discipline
that teodelina villar imposed upon herself was
analogous, though even more painstaking and
detailed. like talmudists and confucians, she
sought to make every action irreproachably
correct, but her task was even more admirable 
and difficult than theirs, for the laws of her
creed were not eternal, but sensitive to the
whims of paris and hollywood. teodelina villar
would make her entrances into orthodox places,
at the orthodox hour, with orthodox
adornments, and with orthodox worldweariness,
but the world-weariness, the
adornments, the hour, and the places would
almost immediately pass out of fashion, and so
come to serve (upon the lips of teodelina villar)
for the very epitome of "tackiness." she sought
the absolute, like flaubert, but the absolute in
the ephemeral. her life was exemplary, and yet
an inner desperation constantly gnawed at her.
she passed through endless metamorphoses, as
though fleeing from herself; her coiffure and the
color of her hair were famously unstable, as
were her smile, her skin, and the slant of her
eyes. from 1932 on, she was studiedly thin....
the war gave her a great deal to think about.
with paris occupied by the germans, how was
one to follow fashion? a foreign man she had
always had her doubts about was allowed to
take advantage of her good will by selling her a 
number of stovepipe-shaped chapeaux. within
a year, it was revealed that those ridiculous
shapes had never been worn in paris, and
therefore were not hats, but arbitrary and
unauthorized caprices. and it never rains but it
pours: dr. villar had to move to calle aráoz*
and his daughter's image began to grace
advertisements for face creams and
automobiles—face creams she never used and
automobiles she could no longer afford!
teodelina knew that the proper exercise of her
art required a great fortune; she opted to retreat
rather than surrender. and besides—it pained
her to compete with mere insubstantial girls.
the sinister apartment on aráoz, however, was
too much to bear; on june 6, teodelina villar
committed the breach of decorum of dying in
the middle of barrio sur. shall i confess that
moved by the sincerest of argentine passions—
snobbery—i was in love with her, and that her
death actually brought tears to my eyes?
perhaps the reader had already suspected that.
at wakes, the progress of corruption allows
the dead person's body to recover its former
faces. at some point on the confused night of
june 6, teodelina villar magically became what
she had been twenty years before; her features
recovered the authority that arrogance, money,
youth, the awareness of being the crème de la
crème, restrictions, a lack of imagination, and
stolidity can give. my thoughts were more or
less these: no version of that face that had so
disturbed me shall ever be as memorable as this
one; really, since it could almost be the first, it
ought to be the last. i left her lying stiff among
the flowers, her contempt for the world growing
every moment more perfect in death. it was
about two o'clock, i would guess, when i
stepped into the street. outside, the predictable
ranks of one- and two-story houses had taken
on that abstract air they often have at night,
when they are simplified by darkness and
silence.
drunk with an almost impersonal pity, i
wandered through the streets. on the corner of
chile and tacuari* i spotted an open bar-andgeneral-store.
in that establishment, to my
misfortune, three men were playing truco*
in the rhetorical figure known as oxymoron,
the adjective applied to a noun seems to
contradict that noun. thus, gnostics spoke of a
"dark light" and alchemists, of a "black sun."
departing from my last visit to teodelina villar
and drinking a glass of harsh brandy in a corner
bar-and-grocery-store was a kind of oxymoron:
the very vulgarity and facileness of it were what
tempted me. (the fact that men were playing
cards in the place in-creased the contrast.) i
asked the owner for a brandy and orange juice;
among my change i was given the zahir; i
looked at it for an instant, then walked outside
into the street, perhaps with the beginnings of a
fever. the thought struck me that there is no
coin that is not the symbol of all the coins that
shine endlessly down throughout history and
fable. i thought of charon's obolus; the alms
that belisarius went about begging for; judas'
thirty pieces of silver; the drachmas of the
courtesan la'is; the ancient coin proffered by
one of the ephesian sleepers; the bright coins of
the wizard in the 1001 nights, which turned
into disks of paper; isaac laquedem's
inexhaustible denarius; the sixty thousand
coins, one for every line of an epic, which
firdusi returned to a king because they were
silver and not gold; the gold doubloon nailed by
ahab to the mast; leopold bloom's unreturning
florin; the gold louis that betrayed the fleeing
louis xvi near varennes. as though in a
dream, the thought that in any coin one may
read those famous connotations seemed to me
of vast, inexplicable importance. i wandered,
with increasingly rapid steps, through the
deserted streets and plazas. weariness halted
me at a corner. my eyes came to rest on a woebegone
wrought-iron fence; behind it, i saw the
black-and-white tiles of the porch of la
concepción.*i had wandered in a circle; i was
just one block from the corner where i'd been
given the zahir.
i turned the corner; the chamfered curb in
darkness* at the far end of the street showed
me that the establishment had closed. on
belgrano i took a cab. possessed, without a
trace of sleepiness, almost happy, i reflected
that there is nothing less material than money, 
since any coin (a twenty-centavo piece, for
instance) is, in all truth, a panoply of possible
futures. money is abstract, i said over and
over, money is future time. it can be an
evening just outside the city, or a brahms
melody, or maps, or chess, or coffee, or the
words of epictetus, which teach contempt of
gold; it is a proteus more changeable than the
proteus of the isle of pharos. it is unforeseeable
time, bergsonian time, not the hard, solid time
of islam or the porch. adherents of
determinism deny that there is any event in the
world that is possible, i.e., that might occur; a
coin symbolizes our free will. (i had no
suspicion at the time that these "thoughts" were
an artifice against the zahir and a first
manifestation of its demonic influence.) after
long and pertinacious musings, i at last fell
asleep, but i dreamed that i was a pile of coins
guarded by a gryphon.
the next day i decided i'd been drunk. i also
decided to free myself of the coin that was
affecting me so distressingly. i looked at it—
there was nothing particularly distinctive about 
it, except those scratches.
burying it in the garden or hiding it in a
corner of the library would have been the best
thing to do, but i wanted to escape its orbit
altogether, and so preferred to "lose" it. i went
neither to the basilica del pilar that morning
nor to the cemetery*; i took a subway to
constitución and from constitución to san
juan and boedo. on an impulse, i got off at
urquiza; i walked toward the west and south; i
turned left and right, with studied randomness,
at several corners, and on a street that looked to
me like all the others i went into the first tavern
i came to, ordered a brandy, and paid with the
zahir. i half closed my eyes, even behind the
dark lenses of my spectacles, and managed not
to see the numbers on the houses or the name
of the street. that night, i took a sleeping draft
and slept soundly.
until the end of june i distracted myself by
composing a tale of fantasy. the tale contains
two or three enigmatic circumlocutions—
sword-water instead of blood, for example,
and dragon's-bed for gold —and is written in
the first person. the narrator is an ascetic who
has renounced all commerce with mankind and
lives on a kind of moor. (the name of the place
is gnita-heidr.) because of the simplicity and
innocence of his life, he is judged by some to be
an angel; that is a charitable sort of
exaggeration, because no one is free of sin—he
himself (to take the example nearest at hand)
has cut his father's throat, though it is true that
his father was a famous wizard who had used
his magic to usurp an infinite treasure to
himself. protecting this treasure from
cankerous human greed is the mission to which
the narrator has devoted his life; day and night
he stands guard over it. soon, perhaps too soon,
that watchfulness will come to an end: the stars
have told him that the sword that will sever it
forever has already been forged. (the name of
the sword is gram.) in an increasingly tortured
style, the narrator praises the lustrousness and
flexibility of his body; one paragraph
offhandedly mentions "scales"; another says
that the treasure he watches over is of red rings
and gleaming gold. at the end, we realize that
the ascetic is the serpent fafnir and the treasure
on which the creature lies coiled is the gold of
the nibelungen. the appearance of sigurd
abruptly ends the story.
i have said that composing that piece of
trivial nonsense (in the course of which i
interpolated, with pseudo-erudition, a line or
two from the fafnismal) enabled me to put the
coin out of my mind. there were nights when i
was so certain i'd be able to forget it that i
would willfully remember it. the truth is, i
abused those moments; starting to recall turned
out to be much easier than stopping. it was
futile to tell myself that that abominable nickel
disk was no different from the infinite other
identical, inoffensive disks that pass from hand
to hand every day. moved by that reflection, i
attempted to think about another coin, but i
couldn't. i also recall another (frustrated)
experiment that i performed with chilean fiveand
ten-centavo pieces and a uruguayan twocentavo
piece. on july 16, i acquired a pound
sterling; i didn't look at it all that day, but that
night (and others) i placed it under a
magnifying glass and studied it in the light of a
powerful electric lamp. then i made a rubbing
of it. the rays of light and the dragon and st.
george availed me naught; i could not rid
myself of my idée fixe.
in august, i decided to consult a psychiatrist.
i did not confide the entire absurd story to him;
i told him i was tormented by insomnia and
that often i could not free my mind of the image
of an object, any random object—a coin, say... a
short time later, in a bookshop on calle
sarmiento, i exhumed a copy of julius barlach's
urkunden zur geschichte der
zahirsage(breslau,1899).
between the covers of that book was a
description of my illness. the introduction said
that the author proposed to "gather into a single
manageable octavo volume every existing
document that bears upon the superstition of
the zahir, including four articles held in the
habicht archives and the original manuscript of
philip meadows taylor's report on the subject."
belief in the zahir is of islamic ancestry, and
dates, apparently, to sometime in the
eighteenth century. (barlach impugns the
passages that zotenberg attributes to abulfeddah.)
in arabic, "zahir" means visible,
manifest, evident; in that sense, it is one of the
ninety-nine names of god; in muslim countries,
the masses use the word for "beings or things
which have the terrible power to be
unforgettable, and whose image eventually
drives people mad." its first undisputed witness
was the persian polymath and dervish lutf ali
azur; in the corroborative pages of the
biographical encyclopedia titled temple of fire,
ali azur relates that in a certain school in shiraz
there was a copper astrolabe "constructed in
such a way that any man that looked upon it but
once could think of nothing else, so that the
king commanded that it be thrown into the
deepest depths of the sea, in order that men
might not forget the universe." meadows
taylor's account is somewhat more extensive;
the author served the nazim of hyderabad and
composed the famous novel confessions of a
thug. in 1832, on the outskirts of bhuj, taylor
heard the following uncommon expression used 
to signify madness or saintliness: "verily he has
looked upon the tiger." he was told that the
reference was to a magic tiger that was the
perdition of all who saw it, even from a great
distance, for never afterward could a person
stop thinking about it. someone mentioned that
one of those stricken people had fled to mysore,
where he had painted the image of the tiger in a
palace. years later, taylor visited the prisons of
that district; in the jail at nighur, the governor
showed him a cell whose floor, walls, and
vaulted ceiling were covered by a drawing (in
barbaric colors that time, before obliterating,
had refined) of an infinite tiger. it was a tiger
composed of many tigers, in the most dizzying
of ways; it was crisscrossed with tigers, striped
with tigers, and contained seas and himalayas
and armies that resembled other tigers.
the painter, a fakir, had died many years
before, in that same cell; he had come from
sind or perhaps gujarat and his initial purpose
had been to draw a map of the world. of that
first purpose there remained some vestiges
within the monstrous image. taylor told this
story to muhammad al-yemeni, of fort
william; al-yemeni said that there was no
creature in the world that did not tend toward
becoming a zaheer,1 [lthis is taylor's spelling
of the word.] but that the all-merciful does not
allow two things to be a zaheer at the same
time, since a single one is capable of entrancing
multitudes. he said that there is always a
zahir—in the age of ignorance it was the idol
called yahuk, and then a prophet from
khorasan who wore a veil spangled with
precious stones or a mask of gold.2 [2 barlach
observes that yahuk figures in the qur'an
(71:23) and that the prophet is al-moqanna (the
veiled prophet) and that no one, with the
exception of the surprising correspondent
philip meadows taylor, has ever linked those
two figures to the zahir.] he also noted that
allah was inscrutable.
over and over i read barlach's monograph. i
cannot sort out my emotions; i recall my
desperation when i realized that nothing could
any longer save me; the inward relief of
knowing that i was not to blame for my
misfortune; the envy i felt for those whose
zahir was not a coin but a slab of marble or a
tiger. how easy it is not to think of a tiger!, i
recall thinking. i also recall the remarkable
uneasiness i felt when i read this paragraph:
"one commentator of the guishan i raz states
that 'he who has seen the zahir soon shall see
the rose' and quotes a line of poetry
interpolated into attar's asrar ñama('the
book of things unknown'): 'the zahir is the
shadow of the rose and the rending of the veil.'
"
on the night of teodelina's wake, i had been
surprised not to see among those present sra.
abascal, her younger sister. in october, i ran
into a friend of hers.
"poor julita," the woman said to me, "she's
become so odd. she's been put into bosch.*
how she must be crushed by those nurses'
spoon-feeding her! she's still going on and on
about that coin, just like morena sackmann's
chauffeur."
time, which softens recollections, only
makes the memory of the zahir all the sharper. 
first i could see the face of it, then the reverse;
now i can see both sides at once. it is not as
though the zahir were made of glass, since one
side is not superimposed upon the other—
rather, it is as though the vision were itself
spherical, with the zahir rampant in the center.
anything that is not the zahir comes to me as
though through a filter, and from a distance—
teodelina's disdainful image, physical pain.
tennyson said that if we could but understand a
single flower we might know who we are and
what the world is. perhaps he was trying to say
that there is nothing, however humble, that
does not imply the history of the world and its
infinite concatenation of causes and effects.
perhaps he was trying to say that the visible
world can be seen entire in every image, just as
schopenhauer tells us that the will expresses
itself entire in every man and woman. the
kabbalists believed that man is a microcosm, a
symbolic mirror of the universe; if one were to
believe tennyson, everything would be—
everything, even the unbearable zahir.
before the year 1948, julia's fate will have
overtaken me. i will have to be fed and dressed,
i will not know whether it's morning or night, i
will not know who the man borges was. calling
that future terrible is a fallacy, since none of the
future's circumstances will in any way affect
me. one might as well call "terrible" the pain of
an anesthetized patient whose skull is being
trepanned. i will no longer perceive the
universe, i will perceive the zahir. idealist
doctrine has it that the verbs "to live" and "to
dream" are at every point synonymous; for me,
thousands upon thousands of appearances will
pass into one; a complex dream will pass into a
simple one. others will dream that i am mad,
while i dream of the zahir.
when every man on earth thinks, day and
night, of the zahir, which will be dream and
which reality, the earth or the zahir?
in the waste and empty hours of the night i
am still able to walk through the streets. dawn
often surprises me upon a bench in the plaza
garay, thinking (or trying to think) about that
passage in the asrar ñama where it is said that
the zahir is the shadow of the rose and the
rending of the veil. i link that pronouncement
to this fact: in order to lose themselves in god,
the sufis repeat their own name or the ninetynine
names of god until the names mean
nothing anymore. i long to travel that path.
perhaps by thinking about the zahir
unceasingly, i can manage to wear it away;
perhaps behind the coin is god.
for wally zenner
the writing of the god
the cell is deep and made of stone; its shape
is that of an almost perfect hemisphere,
although the floor (which is also of stone) is
something less than a great circle, and this fact
somehow deepens the sense of oppression and
vastness. a wall divides the cell down the
center; though it is very high, it does not touch
the top of the vault. i, tzinacan, priest of the
pyramid of qaholom, which pedrode alvarado
burned, am on one side of the wall; on the other 
there is a jaguar, which with secret, unvarying
paces measures the time and space of its
captivity. at floor level, a long window with
thick iron bars interrupts the wall. at the
shadowless hour [midday] a small door opens
above us, and a jailer (whom the years have
gradually blurred) operates an iron pulley,
lowering to us, at the end of a rope, jugs of
water and hunks of meat.
light enters the vault; it is then that i am
able to see the jaguar.
i have lost count of the years i have lain in
this darkness; i who once was young and could
walk about this prison do nothing now but wait,
in the posture of my death, for the end the gods
have destined for me. with the deep flint blade
i have opened the breast of victims, but now i
could not, without the aid of magic, lift my own
body from the dust.
on the day before the burning of the
pyramid, the men who got down from their
high horses scourged me with burning irons, to
compel me to re-veal the site of a buried
treasure. before my eyes they toppled the idol 
to the god, yet the god did not abandon me, and
i held my silence through their tortures. they
tore my flesh, they crushed me, they mutilated
me, and then i awoke in this prison, which i will
never leave alive.
driven by the inevitability of doing
something, of somehow filling time, i tried, in
my darkness, to remember everything i knew. i
squandered entire nights in remembering the
order and the number of certain stone serpents,
or the shape of a medicinal tree. thus did i
gradually conquer the years, thus did i
gradually come to possess those things i no
longer possessed. one night i sensed that a
precise recollection was upon me; before the
traveler sees the ocean, he feels a stirring in his
blood. hours later, i began to make out the
memory; it was one of the legends of the god.
on the first day of creation, foreseeing that at
the end of time many disasters and calamities
would befall, the god had written a magical
phrase, capable of warding off those evils. he
wrote it in such a way that it would pass down
to the farthest generations, and remain
untouched by fate. no one knows where he
wrote it, or with what letters, but we do know
that it endures, a secret text, and that one of the
elect shall read it. i reflected that we were, as
always, at the end of time, and that it would be
my fate, as the last priest of the god, to be
afforded the privilege of intuiting those words.
the fact that i was bounded within a cell did
not prevent me from harboring that hope; i
might have seen qaholom's inscription
thousands of times, and need only to
understand it.
that thought gave me spirit, and then filled
me with a kind of vertigo. in the wide realm of
the world there are ancient forms, incorruptible
and eternal forms — any one of them might be
the symbol that i sought. a mountain might be
the word of the god, or a river or the empire or
the arrangement of the stars. and yet, in the
course of the centuries mountains are leveled
and the path of a river is many times diverted,
and empires know mutability and ruin, and the
design of the stars is altered. in the firmament
there is change. the mountain and the star are 
individuals, and the life of an individual runs
out. i sought something more tenacious, more
invulnerable. i thought of the generations of
grain, of grasses, of birds, of men. perhaps the
spell was written upon my very face, perhaps i
myself was the object of my search.
amid those keen imaginings was i when i
recalled that one of the names of the god was
jaguar — tigre.
at that, my soul was filled with holiness. i
imagined to myself the first morning of time,
imagined my god entrusting the message to the
living flesh of the jaguars, who would love one
another and engender one another endlessly, in
caverns, in cane fields, on islands, so that the
last men might receive it. i imagined to myself
that web of tigers, that hot labyrinth of tigers,
bringing terror to the plains and pastures in
order to preserve the design. in the other cell,
there was a jaguar; in its proximity i sensed a
confirmation of my conjecture, and a secret
blessing.
long years i devoted to learning the order
and arrangement of the spots on the tiger's
skin. during the course of each blind day i was
granted an instant of light, and thus was i able
to fix in my mind the black shapes that mottled
the yellow skin. some made circles; others
formed transverse stripes on the inside of its
legs; others, ringlike, occurred over and over
again—perhaps they were the same sound, or
the same word. many had red borders.
i will not tell of the difficulties of my labor.
more than once i cried out to the vault above
that it was impossible to decipher that text.
gradually, i came to be tormented less by the
concrete enigma which occupied my mind than
by the generic enigma of a message written by a
god. what sort of sentence, i asked myself,
would be constructed by an absolute mind? i
reflected that even in the languages of humans
there is no proposition that does not imply the
entire universe; to say "the jaguar" is to say all
the jaguars that engendered it, the deer and
turtles it has devoured, the grass that fed the
deer, the earth that was mother to the grass, the
sky that gave light to the earth. i reflected that
in the language of a god every word would
speak that infinite concatenation of events, and
not implicitly but explicitly, and not linearly but
instantaneously. in time, the idea of a divine
utterance came to strike me as puerile, or as
blasphemous. a god, i reflected, must speak but
a single word, and in that word there must be
absolute plenitude. no word uttered by a god
could be less than the universe, or briefer than
the sum of time.
the ambitions and poverty of human
words— all, world, universe— are but shadows
or simulacra of that word which is the
equivalent of a language and all that can be
comprehended within a language.
one day or one night—between my days and
nights, what difference can there be?—i
dreamed that there was a grain of sand on the
floor of my cell. unconcerned, i went back to
sleep; i dreamed that i woke up and there were
two grains of sand. again i slept; i dreamed
that now there were three. thus the grains of
sand multiplied, little by little, until they filled
the cell and i was dying beneath that
hemisphere of sand. i realized that i was
dreaming; with a vast effort i woke myself. but
waking up was useless—i was suffocated by the
countless sand. someone said to me: you have
wakened not out of sleep, but into a prior
dream, and that dream lies within another,
and so on, to infinity, which is the number of
the grains of sand. the path that you are to
take is endless, and you will die before you
have truly awakened.
i felt lost. the sand crushed my mouth, but i
cried out: i cannot be killed by sand that i
dream — nor is there any such thing as a
dream within a dream. a bright light woke me.
in the darkness above me, there hovered a
circle of light. i saw the face and hands of the
jailer, the pulley, the rope, the meat, and the
water jugs.
little by little, a man comes to resemble the
shape of his destiny; a man is, in the long run,
his circumstances. more than a decipherer or
an avenger, more than a priest of the god, i was
a prisoner.
emerging from that indefatigable labyrinth
of dreams, i returned to my hard prison as
though i were a man returning home. i blessed
its dampness, i blessed its tiger, i blessed its
high opening and the light, i blessed my old and
aching body, i blessed the darkness and the
stone.
and at that, something occurred which i
cannot forget and yet cannot communicate—
there occurred union with the deity, union with
the universe (i do not know whether there is a
difference between those two words). ecstasy
does not use the same symbol twice; one man
has seen god in a blinding light, another has
perceived him in a sword or in the circles of a
rose. i saw a wheel of enormous height, which
was not before my eyes, or behind them, or to
the sides, but everywhere at once. this wheel
was made of water, but also of fire, and
although i could see its boundaries, it was
infinite. it was made of all things that shall be,
that are, and that have been, all intertwined,
and i was one of the strands within that allencompassing
fabric, and pedro de alvarado,
who had tortured me, was another. in it were 
the causes and the effects, and the mere sight of
that wheel enabled me to understand all things,
without end. o joy of understanding, greater
than the joy of imagining, greater than the joy
of feeling! i saw the universe and saw its secret
designs. i saw the origins told by the book of
the people. i saw the mountains that rose from
the water, saw the first men of wood, saw the
water jars that turned against the men, saw the
dogs that tore at their faces.* i saw the faceless
god who is behind the gods. i saw the infinite
processes that shape a single happiness, and,
understanding all, i also came to understand
the writing on the tiger.
it is a formula of fourteen random
(apparently random) words, and all i would
have to do to become omnipotent is speak it
aloud. speaking it would make this stone prison
disappear, allow the day to enter my night,
make me young, make me immortal, make the
jaguar destroy alvarado, bury the sacred blade
in spanish breasts, rebuild the pyramid, rebuild
the empire. forty syllables, fourteen words, and
i, tzinacán, would rule the lands once ruled by
moctezuma. but i know that i shall never speak
those words, because i no longer remember
tzinacán.
let the mystery writ upon the jaguars die
with me. he who has glimpsed the universe, he
who has glimpsed the burning designs of the
universe, can have no thought for a man, for a
man's trivial joys or calamities, though he
himself be that man. he was that man, who no
longer matters to him. what does he care about
the fate of that other man, what does he care
about the other man's nation, when now he is
no one? that is why i do not speak the formula,
that is why, lying in darkness, i allow the days
to forget me.
for etna risso platero
ibn-hakam al-bokhari,
murdered in his labyrinth
... is the likeness of the spider who buildeth her a house.
qur'an, xxix: 40
"this," said dunraven with a vast gesture
that did not blench at the cloudy stars, and that
took in the black moors, the sea, and a majestic,
tumbledown edifice that looked much like a
stable fallen upon hard times, "is my ancestral
land."
unwin, his companion, removed the pipe
from his mouth and uttered modest sounds of
approbation. it was the first evening of the
summer of 1914; weary of a world that lacked
the dignity of danger, the friends prized the
solitude of that corner of cornwall. dunraven
cultivated a dark beard and was conscious of
himself as the author of quite a respectable epic,
though his contemporaries were incapable of so
much as scanning it and its subject had yet to
be revealed to him; unwin had published a
study of the theorem that fermât had not
written in the margins of a page by diophantus.
both men—is there really any need to say
this?—were young, absentminded, and
passionate.
"it must be a good quarter century ago now,"
said dunraven, "that ibn-hakam al-bokhari,
the chieftain or king or what not of some tribe
or another along the nile, died in the central
chamber of that house at the hands of his
cousin said. even after all these years, the
circumstances of his death are still not entirely
clear."
meekly, unwin asked why?
"several reasons," came the answer. "first,
that house up there is a labyrinth. second, a
slave and a lion had stood guard over it. third,
a secret treasure disappeared— poof!,
vanished. fourth, the murderer was already
dead by the time the murder took place. fifth..."
vexed a bit, unwin stopped him.
"please—let's not multiply the mysteries," he
said. "mysteries ought to be simple. remember
poe's purloined letter, remember zangwill's
locked room."
"or complex," volleyed dunraven.
"remember the universe." 
climbing up steep sandy hills, they had
arrived at the labyrinth. seen at close range, it
looked like a straight, virtually interminable
wall of unplastered brick, scarcely taller than a
man. dunraven said it made a circle, but one so
broad that its curvature was imperceptible.
unwin recalled nicholas of cusa, for whom
every straight line was the arc of an infinite
circle.... toward midnight, they came upon a
ruined doorway, which opened onto a long,
perilous entryway whose walls had no other
windows or doors. dunraven said that inside,
one came to crossing after crossing in the halls,
but if they always turned to the left, in less than
an hour they would be at the center of the maze.
unwin nodded. their cautious steps echoed on
the stone floor; at every branching, the corridor
grew narrower. they felt they were being
suffocated by the house—the ceiling was very
low. they were forced to walk in single file
through the knotted darkness. unwin led the
way; the invisible wall, cumbered with
ruggedness and angles, passed endlessly un-der
his hand. and as he made his way slowly
through the darkness, unwin heard from his
friend's lips the story of ibn-hakam's death.
"what well may be my earliest memory,"
dunraven began, "is ibn-hakam on the docks at
pentreath. he was followed by a black man with
a lion—undoubtedly the first black man and the
first lion i'd ever set eyes upon, with the
exception of those lithographs of bible stories, i
suppose. i was just a boy then, but i'll tell you,
that savage sun-colored beast and night-colored
man didn't make the impression on me that
ibn-hakam did. he seemed so tall. he was a
sallow-skinned fellow, with black eyes and
drooping eyelids, an insolent nose, thick lips, a
saffron yellow beard, a broad chest, and a silent,
self-assured way of walking. when i got home, i
said, 'a king has come in a ship.' later, when
the brickmasons went to work, i expanded upon
the title a bit and called him the king of babel.
"the news that this outsider was to settle in
pentreath was welcome, i must say; the size and
design of his house, though, met with
amazement and even outrage. it seemed
intolerable that a house should be composed of 
a single room but yet league upon league of
hallways. 'that's all very well for the moors,'
people said, 'but no christian ever built such a
house.' our rector, mr. allaby, a man of curious
reading, dug up the story of a king punished by
the deity for having built a labyrinth, and he
read it from the pulpit.
the monday following, ibn-hakam paid a
visit to the rectory; the details of their brief
interview were not made public at the time, but
no sermon afterward ever alluded to the act of
arrogance, and the moor was able to hire his
brickmasons. years later, when ibn-hakam was
murdered, allaby gave a statement to the
authorities as to the substance of their
conversation.
"the words, he said, that ibn-hakam had
stood in his study—not sat, mind you, but stood
—and spoken to him were these, or words very
similar: 'there is no longer any man who can
contemn what i do. the sins that bring
dishonor to my name are so terrible that even
should i repeat the ultimate name of god for
century upon century i would not succeed in
mitigating even one of the torments that shall
be mine; the sins that bring dishonor to my
name are so terrible that even should i kill you
with these very hands, that act would not
increase the torments to which infinite justice
has destined me. there is no land ignorant of
my name; i am ibn-hakam al-bokhari, and i
have ruled the tribes of the desert with an iron
scepter. for many years with the aid of my
cousin sa'ïd i plundered those tribes, but god
hearkened to their cries and suffered them to
rise against me. my men were crushed and put
to the knife. i managed to flee with the treasure
i had hoarded up through my years of pillaging.
sa'ïd led me to the sepulcher of a saint, which
lay at the foot of a stone mountain. i ordered
my slave man to stand watch over the face of
the desert; sa'ïd and i, exhausted, lay down to
sleep. that night i dreamt that i was
imprisoned within a nest of vipers. i awoke in
horror; beside me, in the morning light, sa'ïd
lay sleeping; the brush of a spiderweb against
my skin had caused me to dream that dream. it
pained me that sa'ïd, who was a coward, should 
sleep so soundly. i reflected that the treasure
was not infinite, and that he might claim a part
of it. in my waistband was my dagger with its
silver handle; i unsheathed it and drew it across
his throat. as he died he stammered out a few
words that i could not understand. i looked at
him; he was dead, but i feared that he might yet
stand, so i ordered my slave to crush his face
with a stone. after that, we wandered under the
heavens until one day we glimpsed a sea, with
tall ships furrowing its waves. the thought
came to me that a dead man cannot travel
across the water, so i resolved to seek out other
lands. the first night that we were upon the
ocean i dreamt that i was murdering sa'ïd.
everything happened again, just as it had
before, but this time i understood his words. he
said as you slay me now, so shall i slay you, no
matter where you flee. i have sworn to foil that
threat; i shall hide myself in the center of a
labyrinth, so that his shade may lose its way.'
"that said, ibn-hakam took his leave. allaby
tried to think that the moor was mad and that
that absurd labyrinth of his was a symbol, a
clear testament to his madness. then he
reflected that the notion of madness squared
with the extravagant house and the extravagant
tale, but not with the lively impression that the
man ibn-hakam himself gave. perhaps such
tales were indigenous to the sandy wastes of
egypt, perhaps such oddities like the dragons in
pliny, were attributable less to an individual
person than to a whole culture.... in london,
allaby pored through back issues of the times;
he found that such a rebellion had in fact
occurred, as had the subsequent defeat of albokhari
and his vizier, a man with a reputation
as a coward.
"the moment the brickmasons were done,
ibn-hakam set up house-keeping in the center
of his labyrinth.
he was never seen again by the townspeople;
sometimes allaby feared that sa'ïd had already
gotten to him and killed him. at night, the wind
would bring us the sound of the lion's roaring,
and the sheep in the pen would huddle together
in ancestral fear.
"ships from eastern ports would often
anchor in our little bay here, bound for cardiff
or bristol. the slave would come down from the
labyrinth (which at that time, i recall, was not
pink but bright crimson) and exchange african
words with the crews; he seemed to be looking
out for the vizier's ghost among the men.
everyone knew that these ships carried
contraband, and if they were carrying outlawed
ivories or liquors, why not the ghosts of dead
men?
"three years after the house was built, the
rose of sharon anchored at the foot of the
cliffs. i was not one of those who saw the ship,
so it's altogether possible that the image i have
of her is influenced by some forgotten print of
aboukir or trafalgar, but my understanding is
that she was one of those very elaborately
carved vessels that seem less the work of
shipwrights than of carpenters, and less that of
carpenters than of cabinetmakers. she was (if
not in reality, at least in my dreams) a
burnished, dark, silent, swift craft, manned by
arabs and malays.
"she anchored around dawn one morning in 
october. toward night-fall, ibn-hakam burst
into allaby's house, totally unmanned by terror.
he could hardly manage to tell allaby that sa'ïd
had found his way into the labyrinth, and that
his slave and lion had been murdered. he asked
in all seriousness if the authorities could do
nothing to protect him. before allaby could
answer, he was gone, for the second and last
time—as though snatched away by the same
terror that had brought him to the house.
sitting there alone now in his study, allaby
thought with amazement that this terrified man
had brought iron tribes in the sudan under his
thumb, had known what it is to do battle and
what it is to kill. the next day, he noticed that
the ship had sailed (for suakin in the red sea, it
was later learned). it occurred to him that it was
his duty to confirm the murder of the slave, and
so he climbed up to the labyrinth. al-bokhari's
breathless story had sounded like mad fantasy
to him, but at one corner in the long corridors
he came upon the lion, which was dead, and at
another, he found the slave, who was dead, and
in the central chamber, he found al-bokhari 
himself, whose face had been smashed in. at
the man's feet there was a coffer inlaid with
mother-of-pearl; the lock had been forced and
not a single coin remained."
the final periods, weighted with oratorical
pauses, strained for eloquence; unwin figured
dunraven had pronounced them many times,
with the same self-conscious gravity and the
same paucity of effect.
"how were the lion and the slave killed?" he
asked, to feign interest.
the incorrigible voice answered with somber
satisfaction.
"their faces had been smashed in, as well."
to the sound of their footsteps was added the
sound of rain. it occurred to unwin that they
would have to sleep in the labyrinth, in the
central chamber of the tale, and that in
retrospect he would surely see that long
discomfort as adventure. he remained silent.
dunraven could not contain himself; like a man
who will not forgive a debt, he asked:
"quite an inexplicable story, don't you
think?" 
unwin answered as though thinking out
loud:
"i don't know whether it's explicable or
inexplicable. i know it's a bloody lie."
dunraven burst forth in a torrent of curses
and invoked the eyewitness of the rector's elder
son—allaby, apparently, having died—and of
every inhabitant of pentreath. no less taken
aback than dunraven must have been, unwin
begged his pardon. time, in the dark, seemed
slower, longer; both men feared they had lost
their way, and they were very tired by the time a
dim brightness coming from above showed
them the first steps of a narrow staircase. they
climbed the stairs and found themselves in a
round apartment, a good bit run-down and
gone to seed. two signs of the ill-fated king
remained: a narrow window that looked out
over the moors and the sea, and, in the floor,
the trap door that opened onto the curve of the
staircase. the apartment, though spacious, was
very much like a jail cell.
driven to it less by the rain than by the desire
to live for the memory and the anecdote, the
friends did spend the night within the labyrinth.
the mathematician slept soundly; not so the
poet, who was haunted by lines of poetry that
his rational mind knew to be dreadful:
faceless the sultry and overpowering lion,
faceless the stricken slave, faceless the king.
unwin had thought that the story of albokhari's
murder held no interest for him, yet
he awoke convinced that he had solved it. all
that day he was preoccupied and taciturn,
fitting and refitting the pieces, and two nights
later, he rang up dunraven and asked him to
meet him at a pub in london, where he spoke to
him these words, or words very much like them:
"back in cornwall, i said the story that you'd
told me was a lie. what i meant was this: the
facts were true, or might be true, but told in the
way you told them, they were clearly humbug.
let me begin with the biggest lie of all, the
incredible labyrinth. a fleeing man doesn't hide
out in a labyrinth. he doesn't throw up a
labyrinth on the highest point on the coast, and
he doesn't throw up a crimson-colored
labyrinth that sailors see from miles offshore.
there's no need to build a labyrinth when the
entire universe is one. for the man who truly
wants to hide himself, london is a much better
labyrinth than a rooftop room to which every
blessed hallway in a building leads. that piece
of wisdom, which i submit to you this evening,
came to me night before last, while we were
listening to the rain on the roof of the labyrinth
and waiting to be visited by morpheus. warned
and corrected by it, i chose to ignore those
absurd 'facts' of yours and think about
something sensible."
"set theory, for instance, or the fourth
dimension of space," dunraven remarked.
"no," said unwin with gravity. "i thought
about the cretan labyrinth. the labyrinth at
whose center was a man with the head of a
bull."
dunraven, who had read a great many
detective novels, thought that the solution of a
mystery was always a good deal less interesting
than the mystery itself; the mystery had a touch
of the supernatural and even the divine about it,
while the solution was a sleight of hand. in 
order to postpone the inevitable, he said:
"a bull's head is how the minotaur appears
on medals and in sculpture. dante imagined it
the other way around, with the body of a bull
and the head of a man."
"that version works just as well," unwin
agreed. "what's important is the
correspondence between the monstrous house
and the monstrous creature that lives inside it.
the minotaur more than justifies the existence
of the labyrinth—but no one can say the same
for a threat dreamed in a dream. once one
seizes upon the image of the minotaur (an
image that's unavoidable when there's a
labyrinth in the case) the problem is all but
solved. i do have to confess, however, that i
didn't see that that ancient image was the key to
it, which is why it was necessary for your story
to furnish me with a better, a more exact,
symbol—the spiderweb."
"the spiderweb?" dunraven repeated,
slowly, perplexed.
"yes. i shouldn't be surprised that the
spiderweb (the universal form of the spiderweb,
i mean—the platonic spiderweb) suggested the
crime to the murderer (because there is a
murderer). you'll recall that al-bokhari, in a
tomb, dreamt of a nest of vipers and awoke to
discover that a spiderweb had suggested the
dream to him. let's return to that night on
which al-bokhari dreamt of the tangled nest.
the overthrown king and the vizier and the
slave are fleeing through the desert with a
treasure. they take refuge in a tomb. the
vizier—whom we know to be a coward—sleeps;
the king— whom we know to be a brave man—
does not. so as not to have to share the treasure
with his vizier, the king stabs him to death;
nights later, the murdered man's ghost
threatens the king in a dream. none of this is to
be believed; in my view, the events occurred
exactly the other way around. that night, i
believe, it was the king, the brave man, that
slept, and sa'ïd, the coward, that lay awake. to
sleep is to put the universe for a little while out
of your mind, and that sort of unconcern is not
easy for a man who knows that unsheathed
swords are after him. sa'ïd, a greedy man,
watched over the sleep of his king. he thought
of killing him, perhaps even toyed with the
knife, but he didn't have the courage for it. he
called the slave. they hid part of the treasure in
the tomb, then fled to suakin and on to
england. not to hide from al-bokhari, you
understand, but in fact to lure him to them and
kill him—that was what led the vizier to build
the high labyrinth of bright crimson walls in full
view of the sea. he knew that ships would carry
the fame of the slave, the lion, and the scarlet
man back to the ports of nubia, and that sooner
or later al-bokhari would come to beard him in
his labyrinth. the trap was laid in the web's last
corridor. al-bokhari had infinite contempt for
sa'ïd; he would never stoop to take the slightest
precaution. the long-awaited day at last
arrives; ibn-hakam disembarks in england,
walks up to the door of the labyrinth, passes
through the blind corridors, and has perhaps
set his foot upon the first steps of the staircase
when his vizier kills him—perhaps with a bullet,
i don't know—from the trap door above. then
the slave no doubt killed the lion, and another 
bullet no doubt killed the slave. then sa'ïd
smashed in the three faces with a large rock.
he had to do that; a single dead man with his
face smashed in would have suggested a
problem of identity, but the lion, the black man,
and the king were elements in a series whose
first terms would lead inevitably to the last.
there's nothing strange about the fact that the
man that visited allaby was seized with terror;
he had just committed the dreadful deed and
was about to flee england and recover his
treasure."
a thoughtful, or incredulous, silence
followed unwin's words. dunraven called for
another mug of ale-before he offered his
opinion.
"i accept," he said, "that my ibn-hakam
might be sa'ïd. such metamorphoses, you will
tell me, are classic artifices of the genre—
conventions that the reader insists be followed.
what i hesitate to accept is the hypothesis that
part of the treasure was left behind in the
sudan. remember that sa'ïd was fleeing the
king and the enemies of the king, as well; it's 
easier, it seems to me, to imagine him stealing
the entire treasure than taking the time to bury
part of it. perhaps no odd coins were found
lying about because there were no coins left;
perhaps the brickmasons had consumed a
treasure which, unlike the gold of the
nibelungen, was not infinite. thus we would
have ibn-hakam crossing the sea to reclaim a
squandered treasure."
"not squandered," said unwin. "invested.
invested in erecting upon the soil of infidels a
great circular trap of brickwork intended to
entangle and annihilate the king. sa'ïd's actions,
if your supposition is correct, were motivated
not by greed but by hatred and fear. he stole
the treasure and then realized that the treasure
was not for him the essential thing. the
essential thing was that ibn-hakam die. he
pretended to be ibn-hakam, killed ibn-hakam,
and at last was ibn-hakam."
"yes," agreed dunraven. "he was a wanderer
who, before becoming no one in death, would
recall once having been a king, or having
pretended to be a king." 
the two kings and the two labyrinths1
1this is the story read by the rector from his pulpit.
(see above…)
it is said by men worthy of belief (though
allah's knowledge is greater) that in the first
days there was a king of the isles of babylonia
who called together his architects and his
priests and bade them build him a labyrinth so
confused and so subtle that the most prudent
men would not venture to enter it, and those
who did would lose their way. most unseemly
was the edifice that resulted, for it is the
prerogative of god, not man, to strike confusion
and inspire wonder. in time there came to the
court a king of the arabs, and the king of
babylonia (to mock the simplicity of his guest)
bade him enter the labyrinth, where the king of
the arabs wandered, humiliated and confused,
until the coming of the evening, when he
implored god's aid and found the door. his lips
offered no complaint, though he said to the king 
of babylonia that in his land he had another
labyrinth, and allah willing, he would see that
someday the king of babylonia made its
acquaintance. then he returned to arabia with
his captains and his wardens and he wreaked
such havoc upon the kingdoms of babylonia,
and with such great blessing by fortune, that he
brought low its castles, crushed its people, and
took the king of babylonia himself captive. he
tied him atop a swift-footed camel and led him
into the desert. three days they rode, and then
he said to him,
"o king of time and substance and cipher of
the century! in babylonia didst thou attempt to
make me lose my way in a labyrinth of brass
with many stairways, doors, and walls; now the
powerful one has seen fit to allow me to show
thee mine, which has no stairways to climb, nor
doors to force, nor wearying galleries to wander
through, nor walls to impede thy passage."
then he untied the bonds of the king of
babylonia and abandoned him in the middle of
the desert, where he died of hunger and thirst.
glory to him who does not die. 
the wait
the coach left him at number 4004 on that
street in the northwest part of the city. it was
not yet 9:00 a.m.; the man noted with approval
the mottled plane trees, the square of dirt at the
foot of each, the decent houses with their little
balconies, the pharmacy next door, the faded
diamonds of the paint store and the hardware
store. a long windowless hospital wall abutted
the sidewalk across the street; farther down, the
sun reflected off some greenhouses. it occurred
to the man that those things (now arbitrary,
coincidental, and in no particular order, like
things seen in dreams) would in time, god
willing, become unchanging, necessary, and
familiar. in the pharmacy window, porcelain
letters spelled out "breslauer": the jews were
crowding out the italians, who had crowded out
the native-born. all the better: the man
preferred not to mix with people of his own
blood.
the coachman helped him lift down his
trunk; a distracted- or weary-looking woman
finally opened the door. from the driver's seat,
the coachman handed the man back one of the
coins, a uruguayan two-centavo piece that had
been in the man's pocket since that night in the
hotel in melo. the man gave him forty centavos,
and instantly regretted it: "i must act so that
everyone will forget me. i've made two
mistakes: i've paid with a coin from another
country and i've let this man see that the
mistake matters."
preceded by the woman, the man walked
through the long entryway and on through the
first patio; the room he'd reserved was, as good
luck would have it, off the second patio, in the
rear. there was a bed of ironwork that art had
distorted into fantastic curves suggesting vines
and branches; there were also a tall pine
chifforobe, a night table, a bookcase with books
on the bottommost shelf, two mismatched
chairs, and a washstand with its bowl, pitcher,
and soap dish and a carafe of cloudy glass. a
crucifix and a map of buenos aires province
adorned the walls; the wallpaper was crimson,
with a pattern of large peacocks, tails
outspread. the room's only door opened onto
the patio. the chairs had to be rearranged to
make room for the trunk. the tenant gave his
nod to everything; when the woman asked him
what his name was, he said villari—not as a
secret act of defiance, not to mitigate a
humiliation that quite honestly he didn't feel,
but rather be-cause that name haunted him, he
couldn't come up with another one. certainly he
was not seduced by the literary error of
imagining that adopting the name of his enemy
would be the astute thing to do.
at first sr. villari never left the house, but
after a few weeks had passed he started going
out for a while at nightfall. in the evening he
would occasionally go into the motion-picture
theater three blocks away.
he never sat nearer the screen than the last
row; he always got up a little before the picture
was over.
he saw tragic stories of the underworld; no
doubt they had their errors; no doubt they
included certain images that were also a part of
sr. villari's previous life, but he didn't notice
the errors, because the notion that there might
be parallels between art and life never occurred
to him. he docilely tried to like things; he tried
to take things in the spirit they were offered.
unlike people who had read novels, he never
saw himself as a character in a book.
he never received a letter, or even a circular,
but with vague hopefulness he read one of the
sections of the newspaper. in the afternoon, he
would draw one of the chairs over to the door
and sit and sip gravely at his mate, his eyes
fixed on the ivy that climbed the wall of the twostory
house next door.
years of solitude had taught him that
although in one's memory days all tend to be
the same, there wasn't a day, even when a man
was in jail or hospital, that didn't have its
surprises. during other periods of isolation he
had given in to the temptation to count the days
(and even the hours), but this isolation was
different, because there was no end to it—unless
the newspaper should bring him news one
morning of the death of alejandro villari. it was
also possible that villari was already dead,
and then his life was a dream. that possibility
disturbed him, because he couldn't quite figure
out whether it felt like a relief or a misfortune;
he told himself it was absurd, and he discarded
it. in now-distant days—distant less because of
the lapse of time than because of two or three
irrevocable acts—he had desired many things,
with a desire that lacked all scruples; that
powerful urge to possess, which had inspired
the hatred of men and the love of the occasional
woman, no longer desired things —it wanted
only to endure, wanted not to end. the taste of
the mate, the taste of the black tobacco, the
growing band of shade that slowly crept across
the patio—these were reason enough to live.
there was a wolf-dog in the house, now
grown quite old; villari made friends with it. he
spoke to it in spanish, in italian, and with the
few words he still remembered of the rustic
dialect of his childhood.
villari tried to live in the mere present,
looking neither backward nor ahead; memories
mattered less to him than his visions of the
future. in some obscure way he thought he
could sense that the past is the stuff that time is
made of; that was why time became past so
quickly. one day his weariness felt for a
moment like happiness, at moments such as
that, he was not a great deal more complex than
the dog.
one night he was left shocked, speechless,
and trembling by a burst of pain deep in his
mouth, striking almost at the heart of him.
within a few minutes, that horrible miracle
returned, and then again toward dawn. the
next day villari sent for a cab, which left him at
a dentist's office in the neighborhood of plaza
del once.* there, his tooth was pulled. at the
"moment of truth," he was neither more
cowardly nor more composed than anyone else.
another night, as he came back from the
motion-picture theater, he felt someone shove
him. furious, indignant, and with secret relief,
he turned on the insolent culprit; he spit out a
filthy insult. the other man, dumb-founded,
stammered an apology. he was a tall young
man with dark hair; on his arm was a germanlooking
woman. that night villari told himself 
many times that he didn't know them; still, four
or five days went by before he went out again.
among the books in the bookcase was a
divine comedy, with the old commentary by
andreoli.
impelled less by curiosity than by a sense of
duty, villari undertook to read that
masterpiece. he would read a canto before
dinner, and then, strictly and methodically, the
notes. he did not think of the infernal torments
as improbable or excessive, nor did it occur to
him that dante would have condemned him,
villari, to the farthest circle of hell, where
ugolino's teeth gnaw endlessly at ruggieri's
throat.
the peacocks on the crimson wallpaper
seemed the perfect thing for feeding persistent
nightmares, but sr. villari never dreamed of a
monstrous gazebo of living birds all
intertangled. in the early-morning hours he
would dream a dream of unvarying backdrop
but varying details. villari and two other men
would come into a room with revolvers drawn,
or he would be jumped by them as he came out 
of the motion-picture theater, or they—all three
of them at once—would be the stranger that had
shoved him, or they would wait for him sadfaced
out in the courtyard and pretend not to
know him. at the end of the dream, he would
take the revolver out of the drawer in the
nightstand that stood beside the bed (and there
was a gun in that drawer) and fire it at the men.
the noise of the gun would wake him, but it was
always a dream—and in another dream the
attack would occur again and in another dream
he would have to kill them again.
one murky morning in july, the presence of
strange people (not the sound of the door when
they opened it) woke him. tall in the shadowy
dimness of the room, oddly simplified by the
dimness (in the frightening dreams, they had
always been brighter), motionless, patient, and
watching, their eyes lowered as though the
weight of their weapons made them stoopshouldered,
alejandro villari and a stranger
had at last caught up with him. he gestured at
them to wait, and he turned over and faced the
wall, as though going back to sleep. did he do 
that to awaken the pity of the men that killed
him, or because it's easier to endure a terrifying
event than to imagine it, wait for it endlessly—
or (and this is perhaps the most likely
possibility) so that his murderers would become
a dream, as they had already been so many
times, in that same place, at that same hour?
that was the magic spell he was casting when
he was rubbed out by the revolvers' fire.
the man on the threshold
bioy casares brought back a curious knife
from london, with a triangular blade and an hshaped
hilt; our friend christopher dewey, of
the british council, said that sort of weapon
was in common use in hindustan. that verdict
inspired him also to mention that he had once
worked in hindustan, between the two wars.
(ultraauroremet gangem, i recall him saying
in latin, misquoting a verse from juvenal.)
among the stories he told us that night, i shall 
be so bold as to reconstruct the one that follows.
my text will be a faithful one; may allah prevent
me from adding small circumstantial details or
heightening the exotic lineaments of the tale
with interpolations from kipling. besides, it has
an antique, simple flavor about it that it would
be a shame to lose—something of the 1001
nights.
the precise geography of the facts i am going
to relate hardly matters. and besides—what sort
of exactness can the names amritsar and udh
be expected to convey in buenos aires? i shall
only say, then, that back in those years there
were riots in a certain muslim city, and that the
central government sent a strong fellow in to
impose order. the man was a scot, descended
from an illustrious clan of warriors, and in his
blood there flowed a history of violence. my
eyes beheld him but one time, but i shall never
forget the jet black hair, the prominent
cheekbones, the avid nose and mouth, the
broad shoulders, the strong viking bones.
david alexander glencairn shall be his name
tonight in my story. 
the two christian names befit the man, for
they are the names of kings who ruled with an
iron scepter.
david alexander glencairn (i shall have to
get used to calling him that) was, i suspect, a
man who was greatly feared; the mere
announcement of his coming was sufficient to
cast peace over the city. that, however, did not
keep him from putting into effect a number of
forceful measures. several years passed; the city
and the district were at peace; sikhs and
muslims had put aside their ancient discords.
and then suddenly glencairn disappeared.
naturally, there were any number of rumors of
his having been kidnapped or killed.
these things i learned from my superior,
because there was strict censorship and the
newspapers didn't discuss glencairn's
disappearance— did not so much as mention it,
so far as i can recall. there is a saying, you
know—that india is larger than the world;
glencairn, who may have been all-powerful in
the city to which he was fated by a signature at
the end of some document, was a mere cipher 
in the coils and springs and workings of the
empire. the searches performed by the local
police turned up nothing; my superior thought
that a single individual, working on his own,
might in-spire less resentment and achieve
better results. three or four days later
(distances in india are what one might call
generous), i was working with no great hope
through the streets of the opaque city that had
magically swallowed up a man.
i felt, almost immediately, the infinite
presence of a spell cast to hide glencairn's
whereabouts. there is not a soul in this city (i
came to suspect) that doesn't know the secret,
and that hasn't sworn to keep it. most people,
when i interrogated them, pleaded unbounded
ignorance; they didn't know who glencairn was,
had never seen the man, never heard of him.
others, contrariwise, had seen him not a
quarter of an hour ago talking to such-andsuch,
and they would even show me the house
the two men had gone into, where of course
nobody knew a thing about them—or where i'd
just missed them, they'd left just a minute
earlier. more than once i balled my fist and hit
one of those tellers of precisely detailed lies
smack in the face. bystanders would applaud
the way i got my frustrations off my chest, and
then make up more lies. i didn't believe them,
but i didn't dare ignore then. one evening
somebody left me an envelope containing a slip
of paper on which were written some
directions....
by the time i arrived, the sun had pretty well
gone down. the neighborhood was one of
common folk, the humble of the earth; the
house was squat. from the walkway in the
street i could make out a series of courtyards of
packed earth and then, toward the rear, a
brightness. back in the last courtyard, some
sort of muslim celebration was going on; a
blind man entered with a lute made of reddishcolored
wood.
at my feet, on the threshold of this house, as
motionless as an inanimate thing, a very old
man lay curled up on the ground. i shall
describe him, because he is an essential part of
the story. his many years had reduced and 
polished him the way water smooths and
polishes a stone or generations of men polish a
proverb. he was covered in long tatters, or so it
looked to me, and the turban that wound about
his head looked frankly like one rag the more.
in the fading evening light, he lifted his dark
face and very white beard to me. i spoke to him
without preamble—because i had already lost
all hope, you see—about david alexander
glencairn. he didn't understand me (or
perhaps he didn't hear me) and i had to explain
that glencairn was a judge and that i was
looking for him. when i uttered those words, i
felt how absurd it was to question this ancient
little man for whom the present was scarcely
more than an indefinite rumor. news of the
mutiny or the latest word of akbar, this man
might have (i thought), but not of glencairn.
what he told me confirmed that suspicion.
"a judge!" he said with frail astonishment. "a
judge who is lost and being searched for. the
event took place when i was a boy. i know
nothing of dates, but nikal seyn had not died at
the wall at delhi yet"—
nicholson he meant, you see. "the past lives
on in memory; surely i shall be able to recover
what in that time took place. allah had
permitted, in his wrath, that mankind grow
corrupted; filled with curses were men's
mouths, and with falsehoods and deception.
and yet not all men were perverse, so that when
it was proclaimed that the queen was going to
send a man to enforce the laws of england in
this land, the least evil of men were glad,
because they felt that law is better than
disorder. the christian came, but no time did it
take him to prevaricate and oppress, to find
extenuation for abominable crimes, and to sell
his verdicts. at first, we did not blame him;
none of us were familiar with the english justice
he administered, and for all we knew, this
judge's seeming abuses were inspired by valid,
though arcane, reasons. surely all things have
justification in his book, we tried to think, but
his similarity to the other evil judges of the
world was too clear, and at last we had to admit
that he was simply an evil man. he soon
became a tyrant, and my poor people (in order 
to avenge themselves for the mistaken hope
that once they had reposed in him) came to
entertain the idea of kidnapping him and
putting him to trial. talking was not sufficient;
from fine words, it was necessary that we move
onward to acts. no one, perhaps, with the
exception of the simplest of mind or the
youngest of years, believed that such a terrible
purpose would ever be fulfilled, but thousands
of sikhs and muslims kept their word, and one
day, incredulous, they did what each of them
had thought impossible. they kidnapped the
judge, and for a prison they put him in a
farmhouse in the distant outskirts of the town.
then they consulted with the subjects who had
been aggrieved by him, or in some cases with
the subjects' orphans and widows, for the
executioner's sword had not rested during those
years. at last—and this was perhaps the most
difficult thing of all—they sought for and
appointed a judge to judge the judge."
here the man was interrupted by several
women who made their way into the house.
then he went on, slowly:
"it is said that every generation of mankind
includes four honest men who secretly hold up
the universe and justify it to the lord. one of
those men would have been the most fitting
judge. but where was one to find them, if they
wander the earth lost and anonymous and are
not recognized when they are met with and not
even they themselves know the high mission
they perform? someone, therefore, reflected
that if fate had forbidden us wise men, we had
to seek out fools. that opinion won the day.
scholars of the qur'an, doctors of the law, sikhs
who bear the name of lions yet worship god,
hindus who worship a multitude of gods,
monks of the master mahavira who teach that
the shape of the universe is that of a man with
his legs spread open wide, worshipers of fire,
and black-skinned jews composed the tribunal,
but the ultimate verdict was to be decided by a
madman."
here he was interrupted by several people
leaving the celebration.
"a madman," he repeated, "so that the
wisdom of god might speak through his mouth 
and bring shame to human pride and
overweening. the name of this man has been
lost, or perhaps was never known, but he
wandered these streets naked, or covered with
rags, counting his fingers with his thumb and
hurling gibes at the trees."
my good sense rebelled. i said that to leave
the decision to a madman was to make a
mockery of the trial.
"the accused man accepted the judge," was
the reply. "perhaps he realized that given the
fate that awaited the conspirators if they should
set him free, it was only from a madman that he
might hope for anything but a sentence of
death. i have heard that he laughed when he
was told who the judge was to be. the trial
lasted for many days and nights, because of the
great number of witnesses."
he fell silent. some concern was at work in
him. to break the silence, i asked how many
days it had been.
"at least nineteen days," he replied. more
people leaving the celebration interrupted him;
muslims are forbidden wine, but the faces and 
voices seemed those of drunkards. one of the
men shouted something at the old man as he
passed by.
"nineteen days exactly," he emended. "the
infidel dog heard the sentence, and the knife
was drawn across his throat."
he spoke with joyous ferocity, but it was with
another voice that he ended his story.
"he died without fear. even in the basest of
men, there is some virtue."
"where did this take place that you have told
me about?" i asked him. "in a farmhouse?"
for the first time he looked me in the eye.
then slowly, measuring his words, he
answered.
"i said a farmhouse was his prison, not that
he was tried there. he was tried in this very city,
in a house like all other houses, like this one....
one house is like another—what matters is
knowing whether it is built in heaven or in hell."
i asked him what had happened to the
conspirators.
"that, i do not know," he said patiently.
"these things happened many years ago and by 
now they have been long forgotten. perhaps
they were condemned by men, but not by god."
having said this, he got up. i felt that his
words dismissed me, that from that moment
onward i had ceased to exist for him. a mob of
men and women of all the nations of punjab
spilled out over us, praying and singing, and
almost swept us away; i was astonished that
such narrow courtyards, little more than long
entryways, could have contained such numbers
of people. others came out of neighboring
houses; no doubt they had jumped over the
walls.... pushing and shouting imprecations, i
opened a way for myself. in the farthest
courtyard i met a naked man crowned with
yellow flowers, whom everyone was kissing and
making obeisances to; there was a sword in his
hand. the sword was bloody, for it had
murdered glencairn, whose mutilated body i
found in the stables at the rear. 
the aleph
o god, i could be bounded
in a nutshell and count myself
a king of infinite space.
hamlet, song
but they will teach us that eternity is the standing still
of the present time, a nuncstans (as the schools call it);
which neither they, nor any else understand, no more
than they would a hicstans for an infinite greatnesse of
place.
leviathan, iv:46
that same sweltering morning that beatriz
viter bodied, after an imperious confrontation
with her illness in which she had never for an
instant stooped to either sentimentality or fear,
i noticed that a new advertisement for some
cigarettes or other (blondes, i believe they
were) had been posted on the iron billboards of
the plaza constitución; the fact deeply grieved
me, for i realized that the vast unceasing
universe was already growing away from her,
and that this change was but the first in an
infinite series. the universe may change, but i
shall not, thought i with melancholy vanity. i
knew that more than once my futile devotion
had exasperated her; now that she was dead, i
could consecrate myself to her memory—
without hope, but also without humiliation. i
reflected that april 30 was her birthday;
stopping by her house on calle garay that day
to pay my respects to her father and her first
cousin carlos argentino daneri was an
irreproachable, perhaps essential act of
courtesy. once again i would wait in the halflight
of the little parlor crowded with furniture
and draperies and bric-a-brac, once again i
would study the details of the many
photographs and portraits of her: beatriz
viterbo, in profile, in color; beatriz in a mask at
the carnival of 1921; beatriz' first communion;
beatriz on the day of her wedding to roberto
alessandri; beatriz shortly after the divorce,
lunching at the jockey club; beatriz in
quilines* with delia san marco porcel and
carlos argentino; beatriz with the pekinese that
had been a gift from villegas haedo; beatriz in
full-front and in three-quarters view, smiling,
her hand on her chin.... i would not be obliged, 
as i had been on occasions before, to justify my
presence with modest offerings of books—books
whose pages i learned at last to cut, so as not to
find, months later, that they were still intact.
beatriz viter bodied in 1929; since then, i
have not allowed an april 30 to pass without
returning to her house. that first time, i arrived
at seven-fifteen and stayed for about twentyfive
minutes; each year i would turn up a little
later and stay a little longer; in 1933, a
downpour came to my aid; they were forced to
ask me to dinner. naturally, i did not let that
fine precedent go to waste; in 1934 i turned up
a few minutes after eight with a lovely
confection from santa fe; it was perfectly
natural that i should stay for dinner. and so it
was that on those melancholy and vainly erotic
anniversaries i came to receive the gradual
confidences of carlos argentino daneri.
beatriz was tall, fragile, very slightly stooped;
in her walk, there was (if i may be pardoned the
oxymoron) something of a graceful clumsiness,
a soupçon of hesitancy, or of palsy; carlos
argentinois a pink, substantial, gray-haired 
man of refined features. he holds some sort of
subordinate position in an illegible library in
the outskirts toward the south of the city; he is
authoritarian, though also ineffectual; until very
recently he took advantage of nights and
holidays to remain at home. at two generations'
remove, the italians and the liberal italian
gesticulation still survive in him. his mental
activity is constant, passionate, versatile, and
utterly insignificant. he is full of pointless
analogies and idle scruples. he has (as beatriz
did) large, beautiful, slender hands. for some
months he labored under an obsession for paul
fort, less for fort's ballads than the idea of a
glory that could never be tarnished. "he is the
prince of the poets of la belle france" he would
fatuously say. "you assail him in vain; you shall
never touch him—not even the most venomous
of your darts shall ever touch him."
on april 30, 1941, i took the liberty of
enriching my sweet offering with a bottle of
domestic brandy.
carlos argentino tasted it, pronounced it
"interesting," and, after a few snifters, launched 
into an apologia for modern man.
"i picture him," he said with an animation
that was rather unaccountable, "in his study, as
though in the watchtower of a great city,
surrounded by telephones, telegraphs,
phonographs, the latest in radio-telephone and
motion-picture and magic-lantern equipment,
and glossaries and calendars and timetables
and bulletins...."
he observed that for a man so equipped, the
act of traveling was supererogatory; this
twentieth century of ours had upended the fable
of muhammad and the mountain—mountains
nowadays did in fact come to the modern
muhammad.
so witless did these ideas strike me as being,
so sweeping and pompous the way they were
expressed, that i associated them immediately
with literature. why, i asked him, didn't he
write these ideas down?
predictably, he replied that he already had;
they, and others no less novel, figured large in
the augural canto, prologurial canto, or simply
prologue-canto, of a poem on which he had
been working, with no deafening hurly-burly
and sans reclame, for many years, leaning
always on those twin staffs work and solitude.
first he would open the floodgates of the
imagination, then repair to the polishing wheel.
the poem was entitled the earth; it centered
on a description of our own terraqueous orb
and was graced, of course, with picturesque
digression and elegant apostrophe.
i begged him to read me a passage, even if
only a brief one. he opened a desk drawer, took
out a tall stack of tablet paper stamped with the
letter-head of the juan crisóstomo lafinur
library,* and read, with ringing selfsatisfaction:
i have seen, as did the greek, man's cities
and his fame, the works, the days of various
light, the hunger; i prettify no fact, i falsify no
name, for the voyage i narrate is ... autour de
ma chambre.
"a stanza interesting from every point of
view," he said. "the first line wins the kudos of
the learned, the academician, the hellenist—
though perhaps not that of those would-be 
scholars that make up such a substantial
portion of popular opinion. the second moves
from homer to hesiod (implicit homage, at the
very threshold of the dazzling new edifice, to
the father of didactic poetry), not without
revitalizing a technique whose lineage may be
traced to scripture—that is, enumeration,
congeries, or conglobation.
the third—baroque? decadent? the purified
and fanatical cult of form?— consists of twinned
hemistichs; the fourth, unabashedly bilingual,
assures me the unconditional support of every
spirit able to feel the ample attractions of
playfulness. i shall say nothing of the unusual
rhyme, nor of the erudition that allows me—
without pedantry or boorishness!—to include
within the space of four lines three erudite
allusions spanning thirty centuries of dense
literature: first the odyssey, second the works
and days, and third that immortal bagatelle
that regales us with the diversions of the
savoyard's plume— once again, i show my
awareness that truly modern art demands the
balm of laughter, of scherzo. there is no doubt 
about it— goldoni was right!"
carlos argentino read me many another
stanza, all of which earned the same profuse
praise and comment from him. there was
nothing memorable about them; i could not
even judge them to be much worse than the first
one. application, resignation, and chance had
conspired in their composition; the virtues that
daneri attributed to them were afterthoughts. i
realized that the poet's work had lain not in the
poetry but in the invention of reasons for
accounting the poetry admirable; naturally, that
later work modified the poem for daneri, but
not for anyone else. his oral expression was
extravagant; his metrical clumsiness prevented
him, except on a very few occasions, from
transmitting that extravagance to the poem.1
[
1only once in my lifetime have i had
occasion to examine the fifteen thousand
dodecasyllables of the polyalbion —that
topographical epic in which michael drayton
recorded the fauna, flora, hydrography,
orography, military and monastic history of
england—but i am certain that drayton's
massive yet limited oeuvre is less tedious than
the vast enterprise conceived and given birth by
carlos argentino.]
he proposed to versify the entire planet; by
1941 he had already dispatched several hectares
of the state of queensland, more than a
kilometer of the course of the ob, a gasworks
north of veracruz, the leading commercial
establishments in the parish of concepción,
mariana cambaceres de alvear's villa on calle
once de setiembre in belgrano, and a turkish
bath not far from the famed brighton
aquarium. he read me certain laborious
passages from the australian region of his
poem; his long, formless alexandrines lacked
the relative agitation of the prologue.
i do, however, recall these lines from a satire
in which he lashed out vehemently against bad
poets:
this one fits the poem with a coat of mail
of erudition; that one, with
gala pomps and circumstance.
both flail their absurd pennons to no avail,
neglecting, poor wretches,
the factor sublime—its loveliness! 
it was only out of concern that he might
create an army of implacable and powerful
enemies, he told me, that he did not fearlessly
publish the poem.
hear this. to the right hand of the routine signpost
(coming—what need is there to say?—from northnorthwest)

yawns a bored skeleton—color? sky-pearly.—
outside the sheepfold that suggests an ossuary.
"two audacious risks!" he exclaimed in
exultation, "snatched from the jaws of disaster,
i can hear you mutter, by success! i admit it, i
admit it. one, the epithet routine, while
making an adjective of a synonym for 'highway,'
nods, en passant, to the inevitable tedium
inherent to those chores of a pastoral and rustic
nature that neither georgics nor our own
belaureled don segundo ever dared
acknowledge in such a forthright way, with no
beating about the bush. and the second,
delicately referring to the first, the force-fully
prosaic phrase yawns a bored skeleton, which
the finicky will want to excommunicate without
benefit of clergy but that the critic of more
manly tastes will embrace as he does his very
life. the entire line, in fact, is a good 24 karats.
the second half-line sets up the most animated
sort of conversation with the reader; it
anticipates his lively curiosity, puts a question
in his mouth, and then ... voilà, answers it... on
the instant. and what do you think of that coup
sky-pearly? the picturesque neologism just
hints at the sky, which is such an important
feature of the australian landscape. with-out
that allusion, the hues of the sketch would be
altogether too gloomy, and the reader would be
compelled to close the book, his soul deeply
wounded by a black and incurable melancholy."
about midnight, i took my leave.
two sundays later, daneri telephoned me for
what i believe was the first time in his or my
life. he suggested that we meet at four, "to
imbibe the milk of the gods together in the
nearby salon-bar that my estimable land-lords,
messrs. zunino and zungri, have had the rare
commercial foresight to open on the corner. it
is a café you will do well to acquaint yourself
with." i agreed, with more resignation than
enthusiasm, to meet him. it was hard for us to
find a table; the relentlessly modern "salon-bar"
was only slightly less horrendous than i had
expected; at neighboring tables, the excited
clientele discussed the sums invested by zunino
and zungri without a second's haggling. carlos
argentino pretended to be amazed at some
innovation in the establishment's lighting (an
innovation he'd no doubt been apprised of
beforehand) and then said to me somewhat
severely:
"much against your inclinations it must be
that you recognize that this place is on a par
with the most elevated heights of flores."*
then he reread four or five pages of his poem
to me. verbal ostentation was the perverse
principle that had guided his revisions: where
he had formerly written "blue" he now had
"azure," "cerulean," and even "bluish." the
word "milky" was not sufficiently hideous for
him; in his impetuous description of a place
where wool was washed, he had replaced it with
"lactine," "lactescent," "lactoreous," "lacteal." ...
he railed bitterly against his critics; then, in a 
more benign tone, he compared them to those
persons "who possess neither precious metals
nor even the steam presses, laminators, and
sulfuric acids needed for minting treasures, but
who can point out to others the precise location
of a treasure." then he was off on another tack,
inveighing against the obsession for forewords,
what he called "prologomania, " an attitude that
"had already been spoofed in the elegant
preface to the quixote by the prince of wits
himself." he would, however, admit that an
attention-getting recommendation might be a
good idea at the portals of his new work—"an
accolade penned by a writer of stature, of real
import." he added that he was planning to
publish the first cantos of his poem. it was at
that point that i understood the unprecedented
telephone call and the invitation: the man was
about to ask me to write the preface to that
pedantic farrago of his. but my fear turned out
to be unfounded. carlos argentino remarked,
with grudging admiration, that he believed he
did not go too far in saying that the prestige
achieved in every sphere by the man of letters
alvaro melián lafinur was "solid," and that if i
could be persuaded to persuade him, alvaro
"might be enchanted to write the called-for
foreword." in order to forestall the most
unpardonable failure on my part, i was to speak
on behalf of the poem's two incontrovertible
virtues: its formal perfection and its scientific
rigor—"because that broad garden of rhetorical
devices, figures, charms, and graces will not
tolerate a single detail that does not accord with
its severe truthfulness." he added that beatriz
had always enjoyed alvaro's company.
i agreed, i agreed most profusely. i did,
however, for the sake of added plausibility,
make it clear that i wouldn't be speaking with
alvaro on monday but rather on thursday, at
the little supper that crowned each meeting of
the writers circle. (there are no such suppers,
although it is quite true that the meetings are
held on thursday, a fact that carlos argentino
might verify in the newspapers and that lent a
certain credence to my contention.) i told him
(half-prophetically, half-farsightedly) that
before broaching the subject of the prologue, i 
would describe the curious design of the poem.
we said our good-byes; as i turned down calle
bernardo de irigoyen, i contemplated as
impartially as i could the futures that were left
to me: (a) speak with alvaro and tell him that
that first cousin of beatriz' (the explanatory
circumlocution would allow me to speak her
name) had written a poem that seemed to draw
out to infinity the possibilities of cacophony and
chaos; (b) not speak with alvaro. knowing
myself pretty well, i foresaw that my indolence
would opt for (b).
from early friday morning on, the telephone
was a constant source of anxiety. i was
indignant that this instrument from which
beatriz' irrecoverable voice had once emerged
might now be reduced to transmitting the futile
and perhaps angry complaints of that selfdeluding
carlos argentino daneri.
fortunately, nothing came of it—save the
inevitable irritation inspired by a man who had
charged me with a delicate mission and then
forgotten all about me.
eventually the telephone lost its terrors, but 
in late october carlos argentino did call me. he
was very upset; at first i didn't recognize his
voice. dejectedly and angrily he stammered out
that that now unstoppable pair zunino and
zungri, under the pretext of expanding their
already enormous "café" were going to tear
down his house.
"the home of my parents—the home where i
was born—the old and deeply rooted house on
calle garay!" he repeated, perhaps drowning
his grief in the melodiousness of the phrase.
it was not difficult for me to share his grief.
after forty, every change becomes a hateful
symbol of time's passing; in addition, this was a
house that i saw as alluding infinitely to beatriz.
i tried to make that extremely delicate point
clear; my interlocutor cut me off. he said that if
zunino and zungri persisted in their absurd
plans, then zunni, his attorney, would sue them
ipso facto for damages, and force them to part
with a good hundred thousand for his trouble.
zunni's name impressed me; his law firm, on
the corner of caseros and tacuari, is one of
proverbial sobriety. i inquired whether zunni
had already taken the case. daneri said he'd be
speaking with him that afternoon; then he
hesitated, and in that flat, impersonal voice we
drop into when we wish to confide something
very private, he said he had to have the house so
he could finish the poem—because in one
corner of the cellar there was an aleph. he
explained that an aleph is one of the points in
space that contain all points.
"it's right under the dining room, in the
cellar," he explained. in his distress, his words
fairly tumbled out.
“it's mine, it's mine; i discovered it in my
childhood, before i ever attended school. the
cellar stairway is steep, and my aunt and uncle
had forbidden me to go down it, but somebody
said you could go around the world with that
thing down there in the basement. the person,
whoever it was, was referring, i later learned, to
a steamer trunk, but i thought there was some
magical contraption down there. i tried to
sneak down the stairs, fell head over heels, and
when i opened my eyes, i saw the aleph."
" the aleph?" i repeated. 
"yes, the place where, without admixture or
confusion, all the places of the world, seen from
every angle, coexist. i revealed my discovery to
no one, but i did return. the child could not
understand that he was given that privilege so
that the man might carve out a poem! zunino
and zungri shall never take it from me—never,
never! lawbook in hand, zunni will prove that
my aleph is inalienable."
i tried to think.
"but isn't the cellar quite dark?"
"truth will not penetrate a recalcitrant
understanding. if all the places of the world are
within the aleph, there too will be all stars, all
lamps, all sources of light."
"i'll be right over. i want to see it."
i hung up before he could tell me not to
come. sometimes learning a fact is enough to
make an entire series of corroborating details,
previously unrecognized, fall into place; i was
amazed that i hadn't realized until that moment
that carlos argentino was a madman. all the
viterbos, in fact—beatriz (i myself have said
this many times) was a woman, a girl of
implacable clear-sightedness, but there were
things about her—oversights, distractions,
moments of contempt, downright cruelty—that
perhaps could have done with a pathological
explanation. carlos argentine's madness filled
me with malign happiness; deep down, we had
always detested one another.
on calle garay, the maid asked me to be so
kind as to wait—sr. daneri was in the cellar, as
he always was, developing photographs. beside
the flowerless vase atop the useless piano
smiled the great faded photograph of beatriz,
not so much anachronistic as outside time. no
one could see us; in a desperation of tenderness
i approached the portrait.
"beatriz, beatriz elena, beatriz elena
viterbo," i said. "beloved beatriz, beatriz lost
forever—it's me, it's me, borges."
carlos came in shortly afterward. his words
were laconic, his tone indifferent; i realized that
he was unable to think of anything but the loss
of the aleph.
"a glass of pseudo-cognac," he said, "and
we'll duck right into the cellar. i must forewarn 
you: dorsal decubitus is essential, as are
darkness, immobility, and a certain ocular
accommodation. you'll lie on the tile floor and
fix your eyes on the nineteenth step of the
pertinent stairway. i'll re-ascend the stairs, let
down the trap door, and you'll be alone. some
rodent will frighten you—easy enough to do!
within a few minutes, you will see the aleph.
the microcosm of the alchemists and
kabbalists, our proverbial friend the multum in
parvo, made flesh!
"of course," he added, in the dining room, "if
you don't see it, that doesn't invalidate anything
i've told you.... go on down; within a very short
while you will be able to begin a dialogue with
all the images of beatriz."
i descended quickly, sick of his vapid chatter.
the cellar, barely wider than the stairway, was
more like a well or cistern. in vain my eyes
sought the trunk that carlos argentino had
mentioned. a few burlap bags and some crates
full of bottles cluttered one corner. carlos
picked up one of the bags, folded it, and laid it
out very precisely. 
"the couch is a humble one," he explained,
"but if i raise it one inch higher, you'll not see a
thing, and you'll be cast down and dejected.
stretch that great clumsy body of yours out on
the floor and count up nineteen steps."
i followed his ridiculous instructions; he
finally left. he carefully let down the trap door;
in spite of a chink of light that i began to make
out later, the darkness seemed total. suddenly i
realized the danger i was in; i had allowed
myself to be locked underground by a madman,
after first drinking down a snifter of poison.
carlos' boasting clearly masked the deep-seated
fear that i wouldn't see his "miracle"; in order
to protect his delirium, in order to hide his
madness from himself, he had to kill me. i felt
a vague discomfort, which i tried to attribute to
my rigidity, not to the operation of a narcotic. i
closed my eyes, then opened them. it was then
that i saw the aleph.
i come now to the ineffable center of my tale;
it is here that a writer's hopelessness begins.
every language is an alphabet of symbols the
employment of which assumes a past shared by 
its interlocutors.
how can one transmit to others the infinite
aleph, which my timorous memory can scarcely
contain? in a similar situation, mystics have
employed a wealth of emblems: to signify the
deity, a persian mystic speaks of a bird that
some-how is all birds; alain de lille speaks of a
sphere whose center is everywhere and
circumference nowhere; ezekiel, of an angel
with four faces, facing east and west, north and
south at once. (it is not for nothing that i call to
mind these inconceivable analogies; they bear a
relation to the aleph.) perhaps the gods would
not deny me the discovery of an equivalent
image, but then this report would be polluted
with literature, with falseness. and besides, the
central problem—the enumeration, even partial
enumeration, of infinity—is irresolvable. in that
unbounded moment, i saw millions of
delightful and horrible acts; none amazed me so
much as the fact that all occupied the same
point, without superposition and without
transparency. what my eyes saw was
simultaneous; what i shall write is successive, 
because language is successive. something of it,
though, i will capture.
under the step, toward the right, i saw a
small iridescent sphere of almost unbearable
brightness. at first i thought it was spinning;
then i realized that the movement was an
illusion produced by the dizzying spectacles
inside it. the aleph was probably two or three
centimeters in diameter, but universal space
was contained inside it, with no diminution in
size. each thing (the glass surface of a mirror,
let us say) was infinite things, because i could
clearly see it from every point in the cosmos. i
saw the populous sea, saw dawn and dusk, saw
the multitudes of the americas, saw a silvery
spider-web at the center of a black pyramid,
saw a broken labyrinth (it was london), saw
endless eyes, all very close, studying themselves
in me as though in a mirror, saw all the mirrors
on the planet (and none of them reflecting me),
saw in a rear courtyard on calle soler the same
tiles i'd seen twenty years before in the
entryway of a house in fray bentos, saw
clusters of grapes, snow, tobacco, veins of
metal, water vapor, saw convex equatorial
deserts and their every grain of sand, saw a
woman in inverness whom i shall never forget,
saw her violent hair, her haughty body, saw a
cancer in her breast, saw a circle of dry soil
within a sidewalk where there had once been a
tree, saw a country house in adrogué, saw a
copy of the first english translation of pliny
(philemon holland's), saw every letter of every
page at once (as a boy, i would be astounded
that the letters in a closed book didn't get all
scrambled up together overnight), saw
simultaneous night and day, saw a sunset in
querétaro that seemed to reflect the color of a
rose in bengal, saw my bedroom (with no one in
it), saw in a study in alkmaar a globe of the
terraqueous world placed between two mirrors
that multiplied it endlessly, saw horses with
wind-whipped manes on a beach in the caspian
sea at dawn, saw the delicate bones of a hand,
saw the survivors of a battle sending postcards,
saw a tarot card in a shopwindow in mirzapur,
saw the oblique shadows of ferns on the floor of
a greenhouse, saw tigers, pistons, bisons, tides, 
and armies, saw all the ants on earth, saw a
persian astrolabe, saw in a desk drawer (and
the handwriting made me tremble) obscene, incredible,
detailed letters that beatriz had sent
carlos argentino, saw a beloved monument in
chacarita,* saw the horrendous remains of
what had once, deliciously, been beatriz
viterbo, saw the circulation of my dark blood,
saw the coils and springs of love and the
alterations of death, saw the aleph from
everywhere at once, saw the earth in the aleph,
and the aleph once more in the earth and the
earth in the aleph, saw my face and my viscera,
saw your face, and i felt dizzy, and i wept,
because my eyes had seen that secret,
hypothetical object whose name has been
usurped by men but which no man has ever
truly looked upon: the inconceivable universe.
i had a sense of infinite veneration, infinite
pity.
"serves you right, having your mind boggled,
for sticking your nose in where you weren't
wanted," said a jovial, bored voice. "and you
may rack your brains, but you'll never repay me 
for this revelation—not in a hundred years.
what a magnificent observatory, eh, borges!"
carlos argentino's shoes occupied the
highest step. in the sudden half-light, i
managed to get to my feet. "magnificent... yes,
quite ... magnificent," i stammered.
the indifference in my voice surprised me.
"you did see it?" carlos argentino insisted
anxiously. "see it clearly? in color and
everything?"
instantly, i conceived my revenge. in the
most kindly sort of way— manifestly pitying,
nervous, evasive—i thanked carlos argentino
daneri for the hospitality of his cellar and urged
him to take advantage of the demolition of his
house to remove himself from the pernicious
influences of the metropolis, which no one—
believe me, no one!—can be immune to. i
refused, with gentle firmness, to discuss the
aleph; i clasped him by both shoulders as i took
my leave and told him again that the country—
peace and quiet, you know—was the very best
medicine one could take.
out in the street, on the steps of the
constitución station, in the subway, all the
faces seemed familiar. i feared there was
nothing that had the power to surprise or
astonish me anymore, i feared that i would
never again be without a sense of déjà vu.
fortunately, after a few unsleeping nights,
forgetfulness began to work in me again.
postscript (march ï, 1943): six months after
the demolition of the building on calle caray,
procrustes publishers, undaunted by the length
of carlos argentino daneri's substantial poem,
published the first in its series of "argentine
pieces." it goes without saying what happened:
carlos argentino won second place in the
national prize for literature.2 [2 "i received
your mournful congratulations," he wrote me.
"you scoff, my lamentable friend, in envy, but
you shall confess—though the words stick in
your throat!— that this time i have crowned my
cap with the most scarlet of plumes; my turban,
with the most caliphal of rubies."]
the first prize went to dr. aita; third, to dr.
mario bonfanti; incredibly, my own work the
sharper's cards did not earn a single vote.
once more, incomprehension and envy
triumphed! i have not managed to see daneri
for quite a long time; the newspapers say he'll
soon be giving us another volume. his happy
pen (belabored no longer by the aleph) has
been consecrated to setting the compendia of
dr. acevedo diaz to verse.*
there are two observations that i wish to
add: one, with regard to the nature of the
aleph; the other, with respect to its name. let
me begin with the latter: "aleph," as well all
know, is the name of the first letter of the
alphabet of the sacred language. its application
to the disk of my tale would not appear to be
accidental. in the kabbala, that letter signifies
the en soph, the pure and unlimited godhead;
it has also been said that its shape is that of a
man pointing to the sky and the earth, to
indicate that the lower world is the map and
mirror of the higher. for the mengenlehre, the
aleph is the symbol of the transfinite numbers,
in which the whole is not greater than any of its
parts. i would like to know: did carlos
argentino choose that name, or did he read it, 
applied to another point at which all points
converge, in one of the innumerable texts
revealed to him by the aleph in his house?
incredible as it may seem, i believe that there is
(or was) another aleph; i believe that the aleph
of calle garay was a false aleph.
let me state my reasons. in 1867, captain
burton was the british consul in brazil; in july
of 1942, pedro henríquez ureña* discovered a
manuscript by burton in a library in santos,
and in this manuscript burton discussed the
mirror attributed in the east to iskandar dhual-qarnayn,
or alexander the great of
macedonia. in this glass, burton said, the entire
universe was reflected. burton mentions other
similar artifices—the sevenfold goblet of kai
khosru; the mirror that tãriq ibn-ziyãd found
in a tower (1001 nights, 272); the mirror that
lucían of samosata examined on the moon
(true history, 1:26); the specular spear
attributed by the first book of capella's
satyricon to jupiter; merlin's universal mirror,
"round and hollow and... [that] seem'd a world
of glas" (faerie queene, 111:2,19)—and then
adds these curious words: "but all the foregoing
(besides sharing the defect of not existing) are
mere optical instruments. the faithful who
come to the amr mosque in cairo, know very
well that the universe lies inside one of the
stone columns that surround the central
courtyard... no one, of course, can see it, but
those who put their ear to the surface claim to
hear, within a short time, the bustling rumour
of it... the mosque dates to the seventh century;
the columns were taken from other, preislamic,
temples, for as ibn-khaldün has
written: in the republics founded by nomads,
the attendance of foreigners is essential for all
those things that bear upon carpentry."
does that aleph exist, within the heart of a
stone? did i see it when i saw all things, and
then forget it?
our minds are permeable to forgetfulness; i
myself am distorting and losing, through the
tragic erosion of the years, the features of
beatriz.
for estela canto
afterword
aside from "emma zunz" (whose wonderful
plot—much superior to its timid execution—was
given me by cecilia ingenieros) and "story of
the warrior and the captive maiden" (which
attempts to interpret two supposedly real
occurrences), the stories in this book belong to
the genre of fantasy. of them, the first is the
most fully realized; its subject is the effect that
immortality would have on humankind. that
outline for an ethics of immortality is followed
by "the dead man"; in that story, azevedo
bandeirais a man from rivera or cerro largo
and also an uncouth sort of deity—a mulatto,
renegade version of chesterton's incomparable
sunday. (chapter xxix of the decline and fall
of the roman empire tells of a fate much like
otalora's, though considerably grander and
more incredible.) about "the theologians,"
suffice it to say that they are a dream—a
somewhat melancholy dream—of personal
identity; about the "biography of tadeo isidoro
cruz," that it is a gloss on the martín fierro. i
owe to a canvas painted by watts in 1896 the
story called "the house of asterion" and the
character of its poor protagonist. "the other
death" is a fantasy about time, which i wove
under the suggestion of some of pier damiani's
arguments. during the last war, no one could
have wished more earnestly than i for
germany's defeat; no one could have felt more
strongly than i the tragedy of germany's fate;
"deutsches requiem" is an attempt to
understand that fate, which our own
"germanophiles" (who know nothing of
germany) neither wept over nor even
suspected. "the writing of the god" has been
judged generously; the jaguar obliged me to put
into the mouth of a "priest of the pyramid of
qaholom" the arguments of a kabbalist or a
theologian. in "the zahir" and "the aleph," i
think i can detect some influence of wells' story
"the crystal egg" (1899).
j.l.b. buenos aires, may 3,1949 
postscript (1952): i have added four stories
to this new edition. "ibn-hakam al-bokhari,
murdered in his labyrinth" is not (i have been
assured) memorable, in spite of its
bloodcurdling title. we might think of it as a
variation on the story of "the two kings in
their two labyrinths," interpolated into the
1001 nights by the copyists yet passed over by
the prudent galland. about "the wait" i shall
say only that it was suggested by a true police
story that alfredo doblas read me, some ten
years ago, while we were classifying books—
following the manual of the bibliographic
institute of brussels, i might add, a code i have
entirely forgotten save for the detail that god
can be found under the number 231. the
subject of the story was a turk; i made him an
italian so that i could more easily get inside his
skin. the momentary yet repeated sight of a
long, narrow rooming house that sits around
the corner of calle paraná, in buenos aires,
provided me with the story titled "the man on
the threshold"; i set it in india so that its
improbability might be bearable. 
j.l.b.
the maker (1960)
foreword
for leopoldo lugones*
the sounds of the plaza fall behind, and i
enter the library. almost physically, i can feel
the gravitation of the books, the serene
atmosphere of orderliness, time magically
mounted and preserved. to left and right,
absorbed in their waking dream, rows of
readers' momentary profiles in the light of the
"scholarly lamps," as a miltonian displacement
of adjectives would have it. i recall having
recalled that trope here in the library once
before, and then that other adjective of
setting— the lunario's "arid camel," and then
that hexameter from the æneid that employs,
and surpasses, the same artifice:
ibant obscuri sola sub nocte per umbram. 
these reflections bring me to the door of
your office. i go inside. we exchange a few
conventional, cordial words ,and i give you
this book. unless i am mistaken, you didn't
dislike me, lugones, and you'd have liked to
like some work of mine. that never happened,
but this time you turn the pages and read a line
or two approvingly, perhaps because you've
recognized your own voice in it, perhaps
because the halting poetry itself is less
important than the clean-limbed theory.
at this point, my dream begins to fade and
melt away, like water in water. the vast
library surrounding me is on calle mexico, not
rodríguez peña, and you, lugones, killed
yourself in early '38. my vanity and my
nostalgia have confected a scene that is
impossible. maybe so, i tell myself, but
tomorrow i too will be dead and our times will
run together and chronology will melt into an
orb of symbols, and somehow it will be true to
say that i have brought you this book and that
you have accepted it.
j.l.b. buenos aires, august 9, 1960
the maker*
he had never lingered among the pleasures
of memory. impressions, momentary and vivid,
would wash over him: a potter's vermilion
glaze; the sky-vault filled with stars that were
also gods; the moon, from which a lion had
fallen; the smoothness of marble under his
sensitive, slow fingertips; the taste of wild boar
meat, which he liked to tear at with brusque,
white bites; a phoenician word; the black
shadow cast by a spear on the yellow sand; the
nearness of the sea or women; heavy wine, its
harsh edge tempered by honey—these things
could flood the entire circuit of his soul. he had
known terror, but he had known wrath and
courage as well, and once he had been the first
to scale an enemy wall. keen, curious,
inadvertent, with no law but satisfaction and
immediate indifference, he had wandered the
various world and on now this, now that
seashore, he had gazed upon the cities of men
and their palaces. in teeming marketplaces or
at the foot of a mountain upon whose uncertain
peak there might be satyrs, he had listened to
complex stories, which he took in as he took in
reality—without asking whether they were true
or false.
gradually, the splendid universe began
drawing away from him; a stub-born fog
blurred the lines of his hand; the night lost its
peopling stars, the earth became uncertain
under his feet. everything grew distant, and
indistinct. when he learned that he was going
blind, he cried out. ("stoicism" had not yet been
invented, and hector could flee without selfdiminution.)
now (he felt) i will not be able to
see the sky filled with mythological dread or
this face that the years will transfigure. days
and nights passed over this despair of his flesh,
but one morning he awoke, looked (with calm
now) at the blurred things that lay about him,
and felt, inexplicably, the way one might feel
upon recognizing a melody or a voice, that all
this had happened to him before and that he
had faced it with fear but also with joy and
hopefulness and curiosity. then he descended 
into his memory, which seemed to him endless,
and managed to draw up from that vertigo the
lost remembrance that gleamed like a coin in
the rain—perhaps because he had never really
looked at it except (perhaps) in a dream.
the memory was this: another boy had
insulted him, and he had run to his father and
told him the story.
as though he weren't paying attention, or
didn't understand, his father let him talk, but
then he took a bronze knife down from the
wall—a beautiful knife, charged with power,
that the boy had furtively coveted. now he held
it in his hands, and the surprise of pos-session
wiped away the insult that he had suffered, but
his father's voice was speaking: let it be known
that you are a man, and there was a command
in the voice. night's blindness was upon the
paths; clutching to himself the knife in which he
sensed a magical power, the boy descended the
steep rough hillside that his house stood on and
ran to the seashore, dreaming that he was ajax
and perseus and peopling the dark salt air with 
wounds and battles. it was the precise flavor of
that moment that he sought for now; the rest
didn't matter—the insulting words of his
challenge, the clumsy combat, the return with
the bloodied blade.
another memory, in which there was also a
night and the foretaste of adventure, sprouted
from that first one. a woman, the first woman
the gods had given him, had awaited him in the
darkness of a subterranean crypt, and he
searched for her through galleries that were like
labyrinths of stone and down slopes that
descended into darkness. why had those
memories come to him, and why did they come
without bitterness, like some mere
foreshadowing of the present?
with grave wonder, he understood. in this
night of his mortal eyes into which he was
descending, love and adventure were also
awaiting him. ares and aphrodite—because
now he began to sense (because now he began
to be surrounded by) a rumor of glory and
hexameters, a rumor of men who defend a
temple that the gods will not save, a rumor of 
black ships that set sail in search of a beloved
isle, the rumor of the odysseys and iliads that
it was his fate to sing and to leave echoing in the
cupped hands of human memory. these things
we know, but not those that he felt as he
descended into his last darkness.
dreamtigers*
in my childhood i was a fervent worshiper of
the tiger—not the jaguar, that spotted "tiger"*
that inhabits the floating islands of water
hyacinths along the paraná and the tangled
wilderness of the amazon, but the true tiger,
the striped asian breed that can be faced only
by men of war, in a castle atop an elephant. i
would stand for hours on end before one of the
cages at the zoo; i would rank vast
encyclopedias and natural history books by the
splendor of their tigers. (i still remember those
pictures, i who cannot recall without error a
woman's brow or smile.) my childhood
outgrown, the tigers and my passion for them
faded, but they are still in my dreams. in that
under-ground sea or chaos, they still endure. as
i sleep i am drawn into some dream or other,
and suddenly i realize that it's a dream. at
those moments, i often think: this is a dream,
a pure diversion of my will, and since i have
unlimited power, i am going to bring forth a
tiger.
oh, incompetence! my dreams never seen to
engender the creature i so hunger for. the tiger
does appear, but it is all dried up, or it's flimsylooking,
or it has impure vagaries of shape or an
unacceptable size, or it's al-together too
ephemeral, or it looks more like a dog or bird
than like a tiger.
a dialog about a dialog
a: absorbed in our discussion of
immortality, we had let night fall without
lighting the lamp, and we couldn't see each
other's faces. with an off-handedness or
gentleness more convincing than passion would
have been, macedonio fernández' voice said
once more that the soul is immortal. he assured
me that the death of the body is altogether
insignificant, and that dying has to be the most
unimportant thing that can happen to a man. i
was playing with macedonio's pocketknife,
opening and closing it. a nearby accordion was
infinitely dispatching la comparsita, that
dismaying trifle that so many people like
because it's been misrepresented to them as
being old---i suggested to macedonie that we
kill ourselves, so we might have our discussion
without all that racket.
z: (mockingly) but i suspect that at the last
moment you reconsidered.
a: (now deep in mysticism) quite frankly, i
don't remember whether we committed suicide
that night or not. 
toenails
gentle socks pamper them by day, and shoes
cobbled of leather fortify them, but my toes
hardly notice.
all they're interested in is turning out
toenails—semi-transparent, flexible sheets of a
hornlike material, as defense against— whom?.
brutish, distrustful as only they can be, my toes
labor ceaselessly at manufacturing that frail
armament. they turn their backs on the
universe and its ecstasies in order to spin out,
endlessly, those ten point-less projectile heads,
which are cut away time and again by the
sudden snips of a solingen. by the ninetieth
twilit day of their prenatal confinement, my
toes had cranked up that extraordinary factory.
and when i am tucked away in recoleta,*in an
ash-colored house bedecked with dry flowers
and amulets, they will still be at their stubborn
work, until corruption at last slows them—them
and the beard upon my cheeks. 
covered mirrors
islam tells us that on the unappealable day
of judgment, all who have perpetrated images
of living things will reawaken with their works,
and will be ordered to blow life into them, and
they will fail, and they and their works will be
cast into the fires of punishment. as a child, i
knew that horror of the spectral duplication or
multiplication of reality, but mine would come
as i stood before large mirrors. as soon as it
began to grow dark outside, the constant,
infallible functioning of mirrors, the way they
followed my every movement, their cosmic
pantomime, would seem eerie to me. one of my
insistent pleas to god and my guardian angel
was that i not dream of mirrors; i recall clearly
that i would keep one eye on them uneasily. i
feared sometimes that they would begin to veer
off from reality; other times, that i would see
my face in them disfigured by strange
misfortunes. i have learned that this horror is
monstrously abroad in the world again. the
story is quite simple, and terribly unpleasant. 
in 1927, i met a grave young woman, first by
telephone (because julia began as a voice
without a name or face) and then on a corner at
nightfall. her eyes were alarmingly large, her
hair jet black and straight, her figure severe.
she was the granddaughter and greatgranddaughter
of federalists, as i was the
grandson and great-grandson of unitarians,*
but that ancient discord between our lineages
was, for us, a bond, a fuller possession of our
homeland. she lived with her family in a big
run-down high-ceiling'd house, in the
resentment and savorlessness of genteel
poverty. in the afternoons— only very rarely at
night—we would go out walking through her
neighbor-hood, which was balvanera.* we
would stroll along beside the high blank wall of
the railway yard; once we walked down sarmien
to all the way to the cleared grounds of the
parque centenario.*between us there was
neither love itself nor the fiction of love; i
sensed in her an intensity that was utterly
unlike the intensity of eroticism, and i feared it.
in order to forge an intimacy with women, one 
often tells them about true or apocryphal things
that happened in one's youth; i must have told
her at some point about my horror of mirrors,
and so in 1928 i must have planted the
hallucination that was to flower in 1931. now i
have just learned that she has gone insane, and
that in her room all the mirrors are covered,
because she sees my reflection in them—
usurping her own—and she trembles and
cannot speak, and says that i am magically
following her, watching her, stalking her.
what dreadful bondage, the bondage of my
face—or one of my former faces. its odious fate
makes me odious as well, but i don't care
anymore.
argumentum ornithologicum
i close my eyes and see a flock of birds. the
vision lasts a second, or perhaps less; i am not
sure how many birds i saw. was the number of
birds definite or indefinite? the problem
involves the existence of god. if god exists, the
number is definite, because god knows how
many birds i saw. if god does not exist, the
number is indefinite, because no one can have
counted. in this case i saw fewer than ten birds
(let us say) and more than one, but did not see
nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, or two
birds. i saw a number between ten and one,
which was not nine, eight, seven, six, five, etc.
that integer—not-nine, not-eight, not-seven,
not-six, not-five, etc.—is incon-ceivable. ergo,
god exists.
the captive
in junin or tapalquén, they tell the story. a
young boy disappeared in an indian raid;
people said the indians had kidnapped him. his
parents searched for him without success. many
years went by, and a soldier coming into town
from the interior told them about an indian
with sky blue eyes who might well be their son. 
they finally managed to find this indian (the
story has lost many of its details, and i don't
want to invent what i don't know) and thought
they recognized him. shaped by the wilderness
and his barbaric life, the man could no longer
understand the words of his mother tongue, but
he allowed himself to be led—indifferently,
docilely—back to the house. there, he stopped
(perhaps because the others stopped). he
looked at the door, almost uncomprehendingly.
then suddenly he bowed his head, gave an odd
cry, rushed down the entryway and through the
two long patios, and ran into the kitchen. he
thrust his arm unhesitatingly up into the
blackened chimney of the stove and took out
the little horn-handled knife he had hidden
there when he was a boy. his eyes gleamed with
happiness and his parents wept, because they
had found their son.
that memory may have been followed by
others, but the indian could not live a life that
was hemmed about by walls, and one day he
went off in search of his wilderness. i would like
to know what he felt in that moment of vertigo 
when past and present intermingled; i would
like to know whether the lost son was reborn
and died in that ecstatic moment, and whether
he ever managed to recognize, even as little as a
baby or a dog might, his parents and the house.
the mountebank
one day in july, 1952, the man dressed in
mourning weeds appeared in that little village
on the chaco river.* he was a tall, thin man
with vaguely indian features and the
inexpressive face of a half-wit or a mask. the
townsfolk treated him with some deference, not
because of who he was but because of the
personage he was portraying or had by now
become. he chose a house near the river; with
the help of some neighbor women he laid a
board across two sawhorses, and on it he set a
pasteboard coffin with a blond-haired
mannequin inside. in addition, they lighted
four candles in tall candleholders and put
flowers all around. the townsfolk soon began to
gather. old ladies bereft of hope, dumbstruck
wide-eyed boys, peons who respectfully took off
their pith hats—they filed past the coffin and
said: my condolences, general. the man in
mourning sat sorrowfully at the head of the
coffin, his hands crossed over his belly like a
pregnant woman. he would extend his right
hand to shake the hand extended to him and
answer with courage and resignation: it was
fate. everything humanly possible was done.
a tin collection box received the two-peso price
of admission, and many could not content
themselves with a single visit.
what kind of man, i ask myself, thought up
and then acted out that funereal farce—a
fanatic? a grief-stricken mourner? a madman? a
cynical impostor? did he, in acting out his
mournful role as the macabre widower, believe
himself to be perón? it is an incredible story,
but it actually happened—and perhaps not once
but many times, with different actors and local
variants. in it, one can see the perfect symbol of
an unreal time, and it is like the reflection of a 
dream or like that play within a play in hamlet.
the man in mourning was not perón and the
blond-haired mannequin was not the woman
eva duarte, but then perón was not perón,
either, nor was eva, eva—they were unknown
or anonymous persons (whose secret name and
true face we shall never know) who acted out,
for the credulous love of the working class, a
crass and ignoble mythology.
delia elena san marco
we said good-bye on one of the corners of
the plaza del once.*
from the sidewalk on the other side of the
street i turned and looked back; you had
turned, and you waved good-bye.
a river of vehicles and people ran between
us; it was five o'clock on no particular
afternoon. how was i to know that that river
was the sad acheron, which no one may cross
twice? 
then we lost sight of each other, and a year
later you were dead.
and now i search out that memory and gaze
at it and think that it was false, that under the
trivial farewell there lay an infinite separation.
last night i did not go out after dinner. to
try to understand these things, i reread the last
lesson that plato put in his teacher's mouth. i
read that the soul can flee when the flesh dies.
and now i am not sure whether the truth lies
in the ominous later interpretation or in the
innocent farewell.
because if the soul doesn't die, we are right
to lay no stress on our good-byes.
to say good-bye is to deny separation; it is to
say today we play at going our own ways, but
we'll see each other tomorrow. men invented
farewells because they somehow knew
themselves to be immortal, even while seeing
themselves as contingent and ephemeral.
one day we will pick up this uncertain
conversation again, delia—on the bank of what
river?—and we will ask ourselves whether we
were once, in a city that vanished into the
plains, borges and delia.
a dialog between dead men
the man arrived from the south of england
early one winter morning in 1877. as he was a
ruddy, athletic, overweight man, it was
inevitable that almost everyone should think
that he was english, and indeed he looked
remarkably like the archetypical john bull. he
wore a bowler hat and a curious wool cape with
an opening in the center. a group of men,
women, and babes were waiting for him
anxiously; many of them had a red line scored
across their throats, others were headless and
walked with hesitant, fearful steps, as though
groping through the dark. little by little, they
encircled the stranger, and from the back of the
crowd someone shouted out a curse, but an
ancient terror stopped them, and they dared go
no further. from out of their midst stepped a
sallow-skinned soldier with eyes like glowing
coals; his long tangled hair and lugubrious
beard seemed to consume his face; ten or twelve
mortal wounds furrowed his body, like the
stripes on a tiger's skin. when the newcomer
saw him, he paled, but then he stepped forward
and put out his hand.
"how grievous it is to see such a
distinguished soldier brought low by the
instruments of perfidy!" he said,
grandiloquently. "and yet what deep
satisfaction to have ordered that the torturers
and assassins atone for their crimes on the
scaffold in the plaza de la victoria!"
"if it's santos pérez and the reinafé brothers
you're referring to, be assured that i have
already thanked them,” the bloody man said
with slow solemnity.
the other man looked at him as though
smelling a gibe or a threat, but quiroga* went
on:
"you never understood me, rosas.* but how
could you understand me, if our lives were so
utterly different? your fate was to govern in a
city that looks out toward europe and that one 
day will be one of the most famous cities in the
world; mine was to wage war across the
solitudes of the americas, in an impoverished
land inhabited by impoverished gauchos. my
empire was one of spears and shouts and sandy
wastelands and virtually secret victories in
godforsaken places. what sort of claim to fame
is that?
i live in people's memory—and will go on
living there for many years—because i was
murdered in a stagecoach in a place called
barranca yaco by a gang of men with swords
and horses. i owe to you that gift of a valiant
death, which i cannot say i was grateful for at
the time but which subsequent generations
have been loath to forget. you are surely
familiar with certain primitive lithographs and
that interesting literary work penned by a
worthy from san juan?"
rosas, who had recovered his composure,
looked at the other man contemptuously.
"you are a romantic," he said with a sneer."
the flattery of posterity is worth very little more
than the flattery of one's contemporaries, which 
is not worth anything, and can be bought with a
pocketful of loose change."'
"i know how you think," replied quiroga. " in
1852, fate, which is generous, or which wanted
to plumb you to the very depths, offered you a
man's death, in battle. you showed yourself
unworthy of that gift, because fighting,
bloodshed, frightened you."
"frightened me?" rosas repeated. "me,
who've tamed horses in the south and then
tamed an entire country?"
for the first time, quiroga smiled.
"i know," he slowly said, "from the impartial
testimony of your peons and seconds-incommand,
that you did more than one pretty
turn on horseback, but back in those days,
across the americas—and on horseback, too—
other pretty turns were done in places named
chacabuco and junin and palma redondo and
caseros."
rosas listened expressionlessly, and then
replied.
'"i had no need to be brave. one of those
pretty turns of mine, as you put it, was to
manage to convince braver men than i to fight
and die for me. santos perez, for example, who
was more than a match for you.
bravery is a matter of bearing up; some men
bear up better than others, but sooner or later,
every man caves in."
"that may be," quiroga said, "but i have
lived and i have died, and to this day i don't
know what fear is.
and now i am going to the place where i will
be given a new face and a new destiny, because
history is tired of violent men. i don't know who
the next man may be, what will be done with
me, but i know i won't be afraid."
"i'm content to be who i am," said rosas,
"and i have no wish to be anybody else."
"stones want to go on being stones, too,
forever and ever," quiroga replied. "and for
centuries they are stones—until they crumble
into dust. when i first entered into death, i
thought the way you do, but i've learned many
things here since. if you notice, we're both
already changing."
but rosas paid him no attention; he merely 
went on, as though thinking out loud:
"maybe i'm not cut out to be dead, but this
place and this conversation seem like a dream
to me, and not a dream that /am dreaming,
either. more like a dream dreamed by
somebody else, somebody that's not born yet."
then their conversation ended, because just
then someone called them.
the plot
to make his horror perfect, caesar, hemmed
about at the foot of a statue by his friends'
impatient knives, discovers among the faces
and the blades the face of marcus junius
brutus, his ward, perhaps his very son—and so
caesar stops defending himself, and cries out et
tu, brute? shakespeare and quevedo record
that pathetic cry.
fate is partial to repetitions, variations,
symmetries. nineteen centuries later, in the
southern part of the province of buenos aires, a 
gaucho is set upon by other gauchos, and as he
falls he recognizes a godson of his, and says to
him in gentle remonstrance and slow surprise
(these words must be heard, not read): pero,
¡che! heches, but he does not know that he has
died so that a scene can be played out again.
a problem
let us imagine that a piece of paper with a
text in arabic on it is discovered in toledo, and
that paleographers declare the text to have been
written by that same cede hamete benengeli
from whom cervantes derived don quixote. in
it, we read that the hero (who, as everyone
knows, wandered the roads of spain armed with
a lance and sword, challenging anyone for any
reason) discovers, after one of his many
combats, that he has killed a man. at that point
the fragment breaks off; the problem is to
guess, or hypothesize, how don quixote reacts.
so far as i can see, there are three
possibilities. the first is a negative one: nothing
in particular happens, because in the
hallucinatory world of don quixote, death is no
more uncommon than magic, and there is no
reason that killing a mere man should disturb
one who does battle, or thinks he does battle,
with fabled beasts and sorcerers. the second is
pathetic: don quixote never truly managed to
forget that he was a creation, a projection, of
alonso quijano, reader of fabulous tales. the
sight of death, the realization that a delusion
has led him to commit the sin of cain, awakens
him from his willful madness, perhaps forever.
the third is perhaps the most plausible: having
killed the man, don quixote cannot allow
himself to think that the terrible act is the work
of a delirium; the reality of the effect makes him
assume a like reality of cause, and don quixote
never emerges from his madness.
but there is yet another hypothesis, which is
alien to the spanish mind (even to the western
mind) and which requires a more ancient, more
complex, and more timeworn setting. don
quixote—who is no longer don quixote but a
king of the cycles of hindustan—senses, as he
stands before the body of his enemy, that killing
and engendering are acts of god or of magic,
which everyone knows transcend the human
condition. he knows that death is illusory, as
are the bloody sword that lies heavy in his hand,
he himself and his entire past life, and the vast
gods and the universe.
the yellow rose
it was neither that afternoon nor the next
that giambattista marino died— that illustrious
man proclaimed by the unanimous mouths of
fame (to use an image that was dear to him) as
the new homer or the new dante—and yet the
motionless and silent act that took place that
afternoon was, in fact, the last thing that
happened in his life. his brow laureled with
years and glory, the man died in a vast spanish
bed with carven pillars. it costs us nothing to
picture a serene balcony a few steps away,
looking out toward the west, and, below,
marbles and laurels and a garden whose
terraced steps are mirrored in a rectangular
pool. in a goblet, a woman has set a yellow rose;
the man murmurs the inevitable lines of poetry
that even he, to tell the truth, is a bit tired of by
now:
porpora de'giardin, pompa de'prato,
gemmadi primavera, occhio d'aprile.. .*
then the revelation occurred. marino saw
the rose, as adam had seen it in paradise, and
he realized that it lay within its own eternity,
not within his words, and that we might speak
about the rose, allude to it, but never truly
express it, and that the tall, haughty volumes
that made a golden dimness in the corner of his
room were not (as his vanity had dreamed
them) a mirror of the world, but just another
thing added to the world's contents.
marino achieved that epiphany on the eve of
his death, and homer and dante may have
achieved it as well. 
the witness
in a stable that stands almost in the shadow
of the new stone church, a man with gray eyes
and gray beard, lying amid the odor of the
animals, humbly tries to will himself into death,
much as a man might will himself to sleep. the
day, obedient to vast and secret laws, slowly
shifts about and mingles the shadows in the
lowly place; outside lie plowed fields, a ditch
clogged with dead leaves, and the faint track of
a wolf in the black clay where the line of woods
begins. the man sleeps and dreams, forgotten.
the bells for orisons awaken him. bells are
now one of evening's customs in the kingdoms
of england, but as a boy the man has seen the
face of woden, the sacred horror and the
exultation, the clumsy wooden idol laden with
roman coins and ponderous vestments, the
sacrifice of horses, dogs, and prisoners. before
dawn he will be dead, and with him, the last
eyewitness images of pagan rites will perish,
never to be seen again. the world will be a little 
poorer when this saxon man is dead.
things, events, that occupy space yet come to
an end when someone dies may make us stop in
wonder—and yet one thing, or an infinite
number of things, dies with every man's or
woman's death, unless the universe itself has a
memory, as theosophists have suggested. in the
course of time there was one day that closed the
last eyes that had looked on christ; the battle of
junin and the love of helen died with the death
of one man. what will die with me the day i
die? what pathetic or frail image will be lost to
the world? the voice of macedonia fernandez,
the image of a bay horse in a vacant lot on the
corner of sarrano and charcas, a bar of sulfur
in the drawer of a mahogany desk?
martín fierro
out of this city marched armies that seemed
grand, and that in later days were grand, thanks
to the magnifying effects of glory. after many
years, one of the soldiers returned, and in a
foreign accent told stories of what had
happened to him in places called ituzaingó or
ayacucho.* these things are now as though
they had never been.
there have been two tyrannies in this land.
during the first, a wagon pulled out of la plata
market; as the wagon passed through the
streets, some men on the driver's seat cried out
their wares, hawking white and yellow peaches;
a young boy lifted the corner of the canvas that
covered them and saw the heads of unitarians,
their beards bloody.* the second meant, for
many, prison and death; for all, it meant
discomfort, endless humiliation, a taste of
shamefulness in the actions of every day. these
things are now as though they had never been.
a man who knew all the words looked with
painstaking love at the plants and birds of this
land and defined them, perhaps forever, and in
metaphors of metal wrote the vast chronicle of
its tumultuous sunsets and the shapes of its
moon.* these things are now as though they
had never been. 
also in this land have generations known
those common yet somehow eternal vicissitudes
that are the stuff of art. these things are now as
though they had never been, but in a hotel room
in eighteen-hundred sixty-something a man
dreamed of a knife fight. a gaucho lifts a black
man off the ground with the thrust of his knife,
drops him like a bag of bones, watches him
writhe in pain and die, squats down to wipe off
his knife, unties his horse's bridle and swings
up into the saddle slowly, so no one will think
he's running away from what he's done. this
thing that was once, returns again, infinitely;
the visible armies have gone and what is left is a
common sort of knife fight; one man's dream is
part of all men's memory.
mutations
in a hallway i saw a sign with an arrow
pointing the way, and i was struck by the
thought that that inoffensive symbol had once 
been a thing of iron, an inexorable, mortal
projectile that had penetrated the flesh of men
and lions and clouded the sun of thermopylae
and bequeathed to harald sigurdson, for all
time, six feet of english earth.
several days later, someone showed me a
photograph of a magyar horseman; a coil of
rope hung about his mount's chest. i learned
that the rope, which had once flown through the
air and lassoed bulls in the pasture, was now
just an insolent decoration on a rider's sunday
riding gear.
in the cemetery on the westside i saw a
runic cross carved out of red marble; its arms
splayed and widened toward the ends and it
was bounded by a circle. that circumscribed
and limited cross was a figure of the cross with
unbound arms that is in turn the symbol of the
gallows on which a god was tortured—that "vile
machine" decried by lucían of samosata.
cross, rope, and arrow: ancient implements
of mankind, today reduced, or elevated, to
symbols. i do not know why i marvel at them
so, when there is nothing on earth that
forgetfulness does not fade, memory alter, and
when no one knows what sort of image the
future may translate it into.
parable of cervantes and the quixote
weary of his land of spain, an old soldier of
the king's army sought solace in the vast
geographies of ariosto, in that valley of the
moon in which one finds the time that is
squandered by dreams, and in the golden idol
of muhammad stolen by montalbán.
in gentle self-mockery, this old soldier
conceived a credulous man—his mind unsettled
by the reading of all those wonders—who took it
into his head to ride out in search of adventures
and enchantments in prosaic places with names
such as el toboso and montici.
defeated by reality, by spain, don quixote
died in 1614 in the town of his birth. he was
survived only a short time by miguel de
cervantes. 
for both the dreamer and the dreamed, that
entire adventure had been the clash of two
worlds; the unreal world of romances and the
common everyday world of the seventeenth
century.
they never suspected that the years would at
last smooth away the discord, never suspected
that in the eyes of the future, la mancha and
montici and the lean figure of the knight of
mournful countenance would be no less poetic
than the adventures of sindbad or the vast
geographies of ariosto.
for in the beginning of literature there is
myth, as there is also in the end of it.
devoto clinic january 1955
paradiso, xxxi,108
diodorus siculus tells the story of a god that
is cut into pieces and scattered over the earth.
which of us, walking through the twilight or
retracing some day in our past, has never felt
that we have lost some infinite thing?
mankind has lost a face, an irrecoverable
face, and all men wish they could be that
pilgrim (dreamed in the empyrean, under the
rose) who goes to rome and looks upon the
veil of st. veronica and murmurs in belief: my
lord jesus christ, very god, is this, indeed,
thy likeness in such fashion wrought?*
there is a face in stone beside a path, and an
inscription that reads the true portrait of the
holy face of the christ of jaén. if we really
knew what that face looked like, we would
possess the key to the parables, and know
whether the son of the carpenter was also the
son of god.
paul saw the face as a light that struck him to
the ground; john, as the sun when it shines
forth in all its strength; teresa de jesús, many
times, bathed in serene light, although she
could never say with certainty what the color of
its eyes was.
those features are lost to us, as a magical
number created from our customary digits can 
be lost, as the image in a kaleidoscope is lost
forever. we can see them and yet not grasp
them. a jew's profile in the subway might be
the profile of christ; the hands that give us back
change at a ticket booth may mirror those that
soldiers nailed one day to the cross.
some feature of the crucified face may lurk in
every mirror; perhaps the face died, faded away,
so that god might be all faces.
who knows but that tonight we may see it in
the labyrinths of dream, and not know
tomorrow that we saw it.
parable of the palace
that day the yellow emperor showed his
palace to the poet. little by little, step by step,
they left behind, in long procession, the first
westward-facing terraces which, like the jagged
hemicycles of an almost unbounded
amphitheater, stepped down into a paradise, a
garden whose metal mirrors and intertwined
hedges of juniper were a préfiguration of the
labyrinth. cheerfully they lost themselves in it—
at first as though condescending to a game, but
then not without some uneasiness, because its
straight allées suffered from a very gentle but
continuous curvature, so that secretly the
avenues were circles. around midnight,
observation of the planets and the opportune
sacrifice of a tortoise allowed them to escape
the bonds of that region that seemed
enchanted, though not to free themselves from
that sense of being lost that accompanied them
to the end. they wandered next through antechambers
and courtyards and libraries, and
then through a hexagonal room with a water
clock, and one morning, from a tower, they
made out a man of stone, whom later they lost
sight of forever. in canoes hewn from
sandalwood, they crossed many gleaming
rivers—or perhaps a single river many times.
the imperial entourage would pass and people
would fall to their knees and bow their heads to
the ground, but one day the courtiers came to
an island where one man did not do this, for he 
had never seen the celestial son before, and the
executioner had to decapitate him. the eyes of
the emperor and poet looked with indifference
on black tresses and black dances and golden
masks; the real merged and mingled with the
dreamed—or the real, rather, was one of the
shapes the dream took. it seemed impossible
that the earth should be anything but gardens,
fountains, architectures, and forms of splendor.
every hundred steps a tower cut the air, to the
eye, their color was identical, but the first of
them was yellow and the last was scarlet; that
was how delicate the gradations were and how
long the series.
it was at the foot of the penultimate tower
that the poet (who had appeared untouched by
the spectacles which all the others had so
greatly marveled at) recited the brief
composition that we link indissolubly to his
name today, the words which, as the most
elegant historians never cease repeating,
garnered the poet immortality and death. the
text has been lost; there are those who believe
that it consisted of but a single line; others, of a 
single word.
what we do know—however incredible it
may be—is that within the poem lay the entire
enormous palace, whole and to the least detail,
with every venerable porcelain it contained and
every scene on every porcelain, all the lights
and shadows of its twilights, and every forlorn
or happy moment of the glorious dynasties of
mortals, gods, and dragons that had lived
within it through all its endless past.
everyone fell silent; then the emperor spoke.
"you have stolen my palace!" he cried, and the
executioner's iron scythe mowed down the
poet's life.
others tell the story differently. the world
cannot contain two things that are identical; no
sooner, they say, had the poet uttered his poem
than the palace disappeared, as though in a puff
of smoke, wiped from the face of the earth by
the final syllable.
such legends, of course, are simply literary
fictions. the poet was the emperor's slave and
died a slave; his composition fell into oblivion
because it merited oblivion, and his
descendants still seek, though they shall never
find, the word for the universe.
everything and nothing*
there was no one inside him; behind his face
(which even in the bad paintings of the time
resembles no other) and his words (which were
multitudinous, and of a fantastical and agitated
turn) there was no more than a slight chill, a
dream someone had failed to dream. at first he
thought that everyone was like him, but the
surprise and bewilderment of an acquaintance
to whom he began to describe that hollowness
showed him his error, and also let him know,
forever after, that an individual ought not to
differ from its species. he thought at one point
that books might hold some remedy for his
condition, and so he learned the "little latin
and less greek" that a contemporary would
later mention. then he reflected that what he
was looking for might be found in the
performance of an elemental ritual of humanity,
and so he allowed himself to be initiated by
anne hathaway one long evening in june.
at twenty-something he went off to london.
instinctively, he had already trained himself to
the habit of feigning that he was somebody, so
that his "nobodiness" might not be discovered.
in london he found the calling he had been
predestined to; he became an actor, that person
who stands upon a stage and plays at being
another person, for an audience of people who
play at taking him for that person. the work of
a thespian held out a remarkable happiness to
him—the first, perhaps, he had ever known; but
when the last line was delivered and the last
dead man applauded off the stage, the hated
taste of unreality would assail him. he would
cease being ferrex or tamerlane and return to
being nobody.
haunted, hounded, he began imagining
other heroes, other tragic fables. thus while his
body, in whorehouses and taverns around
london, lived its life as body, the soul that lived
inside it would be cassar, who ignores the
admonition of the sibyl, and juliet, who hates
the lark, and macbeth, who speaks on the moor
with the witches who are also the fates, the
three weird sisters. no one was as many men
as that man—that man whose repertoire, like
that of the egyptian proteus, was all the
appearances of being. from time to time he
would leave a confession in one corner or
another of the work, certain that it would not be
deciphered; richard says that inside himself, he
plays the part of many, and iago says, with
curious words, i am not what i am. the
fundamental identity of living, dreaming, and
performing inspired him to famous passages.
for twenty years he inhabited that guided
and directed hallucination, but one morning he
was overwhelmed with the surfeit and horror of
being so many kings that die by the sword and
so many unrequited lovers who come together,
separate, and melodiously expire. that very
day, he decided to sell his theater. within a
week he had returned to his birthplace, where
he recovered the trees and the river of his
childhood and did not associate them with
those others, fabled with mythological allusion
and latin words, that his muse had celebrated.
he had to be somebody; he became a retired
businessman who'd made a fortune and had an
interest in loans, lawsuits, and petty usury. it
was in that role that he dictated the arid last
will and testament that we know today, from
which he deliberately banished every trace of
sentiment or literature. friends from london
would visit his re-treat, and he would once
again play the role of poet for them.
history adds that before or after he died, he
discovered himself standing before god, and
said to him: i , who have been so many men in
vain, wish to be one, to be myself. god's voice
answered him out of a whirlwind: i, too, am not
i; i dreamed the world as you, shakespeare,
dreamed your own work, and among the
forms of my dream are you, who like me, are
many, yet no one. 
ragnarök
the images in dreams, wrote coleridge,
figure forth the impressions that our intellect
would call causes; we do not feel horror because
we are haunted by a sphinx, we dream a sphinx
in order to explain the horror that we feel. if
that is true, how might a mere chronicling of its
forms transmit the stupor, the exultation, the
alarms, the dread, and the joy that wove
together that night's dream? i shall attempt that
chronicle, nonetheless; perhaps the fact that the
dream consisted of but a single scene may erase
or soften the essential difficulty.
the place was the college of philosophy and
letters; the hour, nightfall. everything (as is
often the case in dreams) was slightly different;
a slight magnification altered things. we chose
authorities; i would speak with pedro
henriquez urefta,* who in waking life had died
many years before. suddenly, we were
dumbfounded by a great noise of demonstrators
or street musicians. from the underworld, we
heard the cries of humans and animals. a voice 
cried: here they come! and then: the gods! the
gods!
four or five individuals emerged from out of
the mob and occupied the dais of the
auditorium. everyone applauded, weeping; it
was the gods, returning after a banishment of
many centuries. looming larger than life as
they stood upon the dais, their heads thrown
back and their chests thrust forward, they
haughtily received our homage. one of them
was holding a branch (which belonged, no
doubt, to the simple botany of dreams);
another, with a sweeping gesture, held out a
hand that was a claw; one of janus' faces looked
mistrustfully at thoth's curved beak. perhaps
excited by our applause, one of them, i no
longer remember which, burst out in a
triumphant, incredibly bitter clucking that was
half gargle and half whistle. from that point on,
things changed.
it all began with the suspicion (perhaps
exaggerated) that the gods were unable to talk.
centuries of a feral life of flight had atrophied
that part of them that was human; the moon of 
islam and the cross of rome had been
implacable with these fugitives. beetling brows,
yellowed teeth, the sparse beard of a mulatto or
a chinaman, and beastlike dewlaps were
testaments to the degeneration of the olympian
line.
the clothes they wore were not those of a
decorous and honest poverty, but rather of the
criminal luxury of the underworld's gambling
dens and houses of ill repute. a carnation bled
from a buttonhole; under a tight suitcoat one
could discern the outline of a knife. suddenly,
we felt that they were playing their last trump,
that they were cunning, ignorant, and cruel, like
aged predators, and that if we allowed ourselves
to be swayed by fear or pity, they would wind up
destroying us.
we drew our heavy revolvers (suddenly in
the dream there were revolvers) and exultantly
killed the gods. 
inferno, i, 32
from the half-light of dawn to the half-light
of evening, the eyes of a leopard, in the last
years of the twelfth century, looked upon a few
wooden boards, some vertical iron bars, some
varying men and women, a blank wall, and
perhaps a stone gutter littered with dry leaves.
the leopard did not know, could not know, that
it yearned for love and cruelty and the hot
pleasure of tearing flesh and a breeze with the
scent of deer, but something in-side it was
suffocating and howling in rebellion, and god
spoke to it in a dream: you shall live and die in
this prison, so that a man that i have
knowledge of may see you a certain number of
times and never forget you and put your figure
and your symbol into a poem, which has its
exact place in the weft of the universe. you
suffer captivity, but you shall have given a
word to the poem. in the dream, god
illuminated the animal's rude understanding
and the animal grasped the reasons and
accepted its fate, but when it awoke there was
only an obscure resignation in it, a powerful
ignorance, because the machine of the world is
exceedingly complex for the simplicity of a
savage beast.
years later, dante was to die in ravenna, as
unjustified and alone as any other man. in a
dream, god told him the secret purpose of his
life and work; dante, astonished, learned at last
who he was and what he was, and he blessed
the bitternesses of his life. legend has it that
when he awoke, he sensed that he had received
and lost an infinite thing, something he would
never be able to recover, or even to descry from
afar, because the machine of the world is
exceedingly complex for the simplicity of men. 
borges and i
it's borges, the other one, that things happen
to. i walk through buenos aires and i pause—
mechanically now, perhaps—to gaze at the arch
of an entryway and its inner door; news of
borges reaches me by mail, or i see his name on
a list of academics or in some biographical
dictionary. my taste runs to hourglasses, maps,
seventeenth-century typefaces, etymologies, the
taste of coffee, and the prose of robert louis 
stevenson; borges shares those preferences, but
in a vain sort of way that turns them into the
accoutrements of an actor. it would be an
exaggeration to say that our relationship is
hostile—i live, i allow myself to live, so that
borges can spin out his literature, and that
literature is my justification. i willingly admit
that he has written a number of sound pages,
but those pages will not save me, perhaps
because the good in them no longer belongs to
any individual, not even to that other man, but
rather to language itself, or to tradition.
beyond that, i am doomed—utterly and
inevitably—to oblivion, and fleeting moments
will be all of me that survives in that other man.
little by little, i have been turning everything
over to him, though i know the perverse way he
has of distorting and magnifying everything.
spinoza believed that all things wish to go on
being what they are—stone wishes eternally to
be stone, and tiger, to be tiger. i shall endure in
borges, not in myself (if, indeed, i am anybody
at all), but i recognize myself less in his books
than in many others', or in the tedious
strumming of a guitar. years ago i tried to free
myself from him, and i moved on from the
mythologies of the slums and outskirts of the
city to games with time and infinity, but those
games belong to borges now, and i shall have to
think up other things. so my life is a pointcounterpoint,
a kind of fugue, and a falling
away—and everything winds up being lost to
me, and everything falls into oblivion, or into
the hands of the other man.
i am not sure which of us it is that's writing
this page.
museum
on exactitude in science
in that empire, the art of cartography
attained such perfection that the map of a
single province occupied the entirety of a city,
and the map of the empire, the entirety of a
province. in time, those unconscionable maps
no longer satisfied, and the cartographers
guilds struck a map of the empire whose size
was that of the empire, and which coincided
point for point with it. the following
generations, who were not so fond of the study
of cartography as their forebears had been,
saw that that vast map was useless, and not
without some pitilessness was it, that they
delivered it up to the inclemencies of sun and
winters. in the deserts of the west, still today,
there are tattered ruins of that map, inhabited
by animals and beggars; in all the land there is
no other relic of the disciplines of geography.
suárez miranda, viajes de varones
prudentes, libroiv,cap. xlv, lérida,1658
in memoriam, j.f.k.
this bullet is an old one.
in 1897, it was fired at the president of
uruguay by a young man from montevideo,
avelino arredondo, who had spent long weeks 
without seeing anyone so that the world might
know that he acted alone. thirty years earlier,
lincoln had been murdered by that same ball,
by the criminal or magical hand of an actor
transformed by the words of shakespeare into
marcus brutus, caesar's murderer. in the midseventeenth
century, vengeance had employed
it for the assassination of sweden's gustavus
adolphus, in the midst of the public hecatomb
of a battle.
in earlier times, the bullet had been other
things, because pythagorean metempsychosis is
not reserved for humankind alone. it was the
silken cord given to viziers in the east, the rifles
and bayonets that cut down the defenders of the
alamo, the triangular blade that slit a queen's
throat, the wood of the cross and the dark nails
that pierced the flesh of the redeemer, the
poison kept by the carthaginian chief in an iron
ring on his finger, the serene goblet that
socrates drank down one evening.
in the dawn of time it was the stone that cain
hurled at abel, and in the future it shall be
many things that we cannot even imagine
today, but that will be able to put an end to men
and their wondrous, fragile life.
afterword
god grant that the essential monotony of
this miscellany (which time has compiled, not
i, and into which have been bundled long-ago
pieces that i've not had the courage to revise,
for i wrote them out of a different concept of
literature) be less obvious than the
geographical and historical diversity of its
subjects. of all the books i have sent to press,
none, i think, is as personal as this motley,
disorganized anthology, precisely because it
abounds in reflections and interpolations. few
things have happened to me, though many
things i have read. or rather, few things have
happened to me more worthy of remembering
than the philosophy of schopenhauer or
england's verbal music.
a man sets out to draw the world. as the
years go by, he peoples a space with images of
provinces, kingdoms, mountains, bays, ships,
islands, fishes, rooms, instruments, stars,
horses, and individuals. a short time before he
dies, he discovers that that patient labyrinth of
lines traces the lineaments of his own face.
j.l.b. buenos aires, october 31,1960
in praise of darkness (1969)
foreword
without realizing at first that i was doing so,
i have devoted my long life to literature,
teaching, idleness, the quiet adventures of
conversation, philology (which i know very
little about), the mysterious habit of buenos
aires, and the perplexities which not without
some arrogance are called metaphysics. nor has
my life been without its friendships, which are
what really matter. i don't believe i have a
single enemy—if i do, nobody ever told me. the
truth is that no one can hurt us except the
people we love. now, at my seventy years of age
(the phrase is whitman's), i send to the press
this fifth book of verse.
carlos frías has suggested that i take
advantage of the foreword to this book to
declare my aesthetics.
my poverty, my will, resist that suggestion. i
do not have an aesthetics. time has taught me a
few tricks—avoiding synonyms, the drawback to
which is that they suggest imaginary
differences; avoiding hispanicisms,
argentinisms, archaisms, and neologisms;
using everyday words rather than shocking
ones; inserting circumstantial details, which are
now demanded by readers, into my stories;
feigning a slight uncertainty, since even though
reality is precise, memory isn't; narrating
events (this i learned from kipling and the
icelandic sagas) as though i didn't fully
understand them; remembering that tradition,
conventions, "the rules," are not an obligation,
and that time will surely repeal them—but such
tricks (or habits) are most certainly not an
aesthetics. anyway, i don't believe in those
formulations that people call "an aesthetics." as
a general rule, they are no more than useless
abstractions; they vary from author to author
and even from text to text, and can never be
more than occasional stimuli or tools.
this, as i said, is my fifth book of poetry. it is
reasonable to assume that it will be no better or
worse than the others. to the mirrors,
labyrinths, and swords that my resigned reader
will already have been prepared for have been
added two new subjects: old age and ethics.
ethics, as we all know, was a constant
preoccupation of a certain dear friend that
literature brought me, robert louis stevenson.
one of the virtues that make me prefer
protestant nations to catholic ones is their
concern for ethics. milton tried to educate the
children in his academy in the knowledge of
physics, mathematics, astronomy, and natural
sciences; in the mid-seventeenth century dr.
johnson was to observe that "prudence and
justice are pre-eminences and virtues which
belong to all times and all places; we are
perpetually moralists and only sometimes
geometers."
in these pages the forms of prose and verse
coexist, i believe, without discord. i might cite
illustrious antecedents—boethius' consolation
of philosophy, chaucer's tales, the book of the
thousand nights and a night, i prefer to say
that those divergences look to me to be
accidental—i hope this book will be read as a
book of verse. a volume, perse, is not
anœsthetic moment, it is one physical object
among many; the aesthetic moment can only
occur when the volume is written or read. one
often hears that free verse is simply a
typographical sham; i think there's a basic error
in that statement. beyond the rhythm of a line
of verse, its typographical arrangement serves
to tell the reader that it's poetic emotion, not
information or rationality, that he or she should
expect. i once yearned after the long breath line
of the psalms.
in the spanish version of this foreword, i
deliberately spelled the word with its initial p,
which is reprobated by most peninsular
grammarians. the members of the spanish
royal academy want to impose their own
phonetic inabilities on the new world; they
suggest such provincial forms as neuma for
pneuma, skologia for psi-cología, and síquico
for psíquico. they've even taken to prescribing
vikingo for viking. i have a feeling we'll soon
be hearing talk of the works of kiplingo. or
walt whitman; after all these years i now see, a
bit melancholically, that i have done no more
than alternate between one and another
classical meter: the alexandrine, the
hendecasyllable, the heptasyllable.
in a certain milonga i have attempted,
respectfully, to imitate the florid valor of
ascasubi* and the coplas of the barrios.
poetry is no less mysterious than the other
elements of the orb. a lucky line here and there
should not make us think any higher of
ourselves, for such lines are the gift of chance
or the spirit; only the errors are our own. i hope
the reader may find in my pages something that
merits being remembered; in this world, beauty
is so common.
j.l.b. buenos aires, june 24,1969
the ethnographer
i was told about the case in texas, but it had
happened in another state. it has a single
protagonist (though in every story there are
thousands of protagonists, visible and invisible,
alive and dead). the man's name, i believe, was
fred murdock. he was tall, as americans are;
his hair was neither blond nor dark, his features
were sharp, and he spoke very little. there was
nothing singular about him, not even that
feigned singularity that young men affect. he
was naturally respectful, and he distrusted
neither books nor the men and women who
write them. he was at that age when a man
doesn't yet know who he is, and so is ready to
throw himself into whatever chance puts in his
way—persian mysticism or the unknown origins
of hungarian, algebra or the hazards of war,
puritanism or orgy. at the university, an adviser
had interested him in amerindian languages.
certain esoteric rites still survived in certain
tribes out west; one of his professors, an older
man, suggested that he go live on a reservation,
observe the rites, and discover the secret
revealed by the medicine men to the initiates.
when he came back, he would have his
dissertation, and the university authorities
would see that it was published.
murdock leaped at the suggestion. one of his
ancestors had died in the frontier wars; that
bygone conflict of his race was now a link. he
must have foreseen the difficulties that lay
ahead for him; he would have to convince the
red men to accept him as one of their own. he
set out upon the long adventure. he lived for
more than two years on the prairie, sometimes
sheltered by adobe walls and sometimes in the
open. he rose before dawn, went to bed at
sundown, and came to dream in a language that
was not that of his fathers. he conditioned his
palate to harsh flavors, he covered himself with
strange clothing, he forgot his friends and the
city, he came to think in a fashion that the logic
of his mind rejected. during the first few
months of his new education he secretly took
notes; later, he tore the notes up— perhaps to
avoid drawing suspicion upon himself, perhaps
because he no longer needed them.
after a period of time (determined upon in
advance by certain practices, both spiritual and
physical), the priest instructed murdock to start
remembering his dreams, and to recount them
to him at daybreak each morning. the young
man found that on nights of the full moon he
dreamed of buffalo. he reported these recurrent
dreams to his teacher; the teacher at last
revealed to him the tribe's secret doctrine. one
morning, without saying a word to anyone,
murdock left.
in the city, he was homesick for those first
evenings on the prairie when, long ago, he had
been homesick for the city. he made his way to
his professor's office and told him that he knew
the secret, but had resolved not to reveal it.
"are you bound by your oath?" the professor
asked.
"that's not the reason," murdock replied. "i
learned something out there that i can't
express."
"the english language may not be able to
communicate it," the professor suggested.
"that's not it, sir. now that i possess the
secret, i could tell it in a hundred different and
even contradictory ways. i don't know how to
tell you this, but the secret is beautiful, and
science, our science, seems mere frivolity to me
now."
after a pause he added:
"and anyway, the secret is not as important
as the paths that led me to it. each person has
to walk those paths himself."
the professor spoke coldly:
"i will inform the committee of your
decision. are you planning to live among the
indians?"
"no," murdock answered. "i may not even go
back to the prairie. what the men of the prairie
taught me is good anywhere and for any
circumstances."
that was the essence of their conversation.
fred married, divorced, and is now one of
the librarians at yale. 
pedro salvadores
for juan murchison
i want to put in writing, perhaps for the first
time, one of the strangest and saddest events in
the history of my country. the best way to go
about it, i believe, is to keep my own part in the
telling of the story small, and to suppress all
picturesque additions and speculative
conjectures.
a man, a woman, and the vast shadow of a
dictator* are the story's three protagonists. the
man's name was pedro salvadores; my
grandfather acevedo was a witness to his
existence, a few days or weeks after the battle of
monte caseros. there may have been no real
difference between pedro salvadores and the
common run of mankind, but his fate, the years
of it, made him unique. he was a gentleman
much like the other gentlemen of his day, with a
place in the city and some land (we may
imagine) in the country; he was a member of
the unitarian party.* his wife's maiden name
was planes; they lived together on calle
suipacha, not far from the corner of temple.*
the house in which the events took place was
much like the others on the street: the front
door, the vestibule, the inner door, the rooms,
the shadowy depth of the patios. one night in
1842, pedro salvadores and his wife heard the
dull sound of hoofbeats coming closer and
closer up the dusty street, and the wild huzzahs
and imprecations of the horses' riders. but this
time the horsemen of the tyrant's posse* did not
pass them by. the whooping and shouting
became insistent banging on the door. then, as
the men were breaking down the door,
salvadores managed to push the dining table to
one side, lift the rug, and hide himself in the
cellar.
his wife moved the table back into place. the
posse burst into the house; they had come to get
salvadores. his wife told them he'd fled—to
montevideo, she told them. they didn't believe
her; they lashed her with their whips, smashed 
all the sky blue china,* and searched the house,
but it never occurred to them to lift the rug.
they left at midnight, vowing to return.
it is at this point that the story of pedro
salvadores truly begins. he lived in that cellar
for nine years. no matter how often we tell
ourselves that years are made of days, and days
of hours, and that nine years is an abstraction,
an impossible sum, the story still horrifies and
appalls. i suspect that in the darkness that his
eyes learned to fathom, he came not to think of
anything—not even his hatred or his danger. he
was simply there, in the cellar. now and again,
echoes of that world he could not enter would
reach him from above: his wife's footsteps as
she went about her routine, the , thump of the
water pump and the pail, the pelting of rain in
the patio. every day, too, might be his last.
his wife gradually got rid of all the servants;
they were capable of informing on them. she
told her family that her husband was in
uruguay. she earned a living for the two of
them by sewing for the army. in the course of
time she had two children; her family,
attributing the children to a lover, repudiated
her. after the fall of the tyrant they got down on
their knees to her and begged forgiveness.
what, who, was pedro salvadores? was he
imprisoned by terror, love, the invisible
presence of buenos aires, or, in the final
analysis, habit? to keep him from leaving her,
his wife would give him vague news of
conspiracies and victories. perhaps he was a
coward, and his wife faithfully hid from him
that she knew that. i picture him in his cellar,
perhaps without even an oil lamp, or a book.
the darkness would draw him under, into sleep.
he would dream, at first, of the dreadful night
when the knife would seek the throat, or dream
of open streets, or of the plains. within a few
years, he would be incapable of fleeing, and he
would dream of the cellar. at first he was a
hunted man, a man in danger; later ... we will
never know—a quiet animal in its burrows, or
some sort of obscure deity?
all this, until that summer day in 1852 when
the dictator rosas fled the country. it was then
that the secret man emerged into the light of
day; my grandfather actually spoke with him.
puffy, slack-muscled, and obese, pedro
salvadores was the color of wax, and he spoke
in a faint whisper. the government had
confiscated his land; it was never returned to
him. i believe he died in poverty.
we see the fate of pedro salvadores, like all
things, as a symbol of something that we are
just on the verge of understanding----
legend
cain and abel came upon each other after
abel's death. they were walking through the
desert, and they recognized each other from
afar, since both men were very tall. the two
brothers sat on the ground, made a fire, and ate.
they sat silently, as weary people do when dusk
begins to fall. in the sky, a star glimmered,
though it had not yet been given a name. in the
light of the fire, cain saw that abel's forehead
bore the mark of the stone, and he dropped the 
bread he was about to carry to his mouth and
asked his brother to forgive him.
"was it you that killed me, or did i kill you?"
abel answered. "i don't re-member anymore;
here we are, together, like before."
"now i know that you have truly forgiven
me," cain said, "because forgetting is forgiving.
i, too, will try to forget."
"yes," said abel slowly. "so long as remorse
lasts, guilt lasts."
a prayer
thousands of times, and in both of the
languages that are a part of me, my lips have
pronounced, and shall go on pronouncing, the
paternoster, yet i only partly understand it.
this morning—july 1, 1969—i want to attempt
a prayer that is personal, not inherited. i know
that such an undertaking demands a sincerity
that is more than human. first of all, obviously
i am barred from asking for anything. asking
that my eyes not be filled with night would be
madness; i know of thousands of people who
can see, yet who are not particularly happy,
just, or wise. time's march is a web of causes
and effects, and asking for any gift of mercy,
however tiny it might be, is to ask that a link be
broken in that web of iron, ask that it be
already broken. no one deserves such a
miracle. nor can i plead that my trespasses be
forgiven; forgiveness is the act of another, and
only i myself can save me. forgiveness purifies
the offended party, not the offender, who is
virtually untouched by it. the freeness of my
"free will" is perhaps illusory, but i am able to
give, or to dream that i give. i can give courage,
which i do not possess; i can give hope, which
does not lie within me; i can teach a willingness
to learn that which i hardly know myself, or
merely glimpse. i want to be remembered less
as poet than as friend; i want someone to repeat
a cadence from dunbar or frost or that man
who, at midnight, looked upon that tree that
bleeds, the cross, and to reflect that he heard
those words for the first time from my lips.
none of the rest matters to me; i hope that
oblivion will not long delay. the designs of the
universe are unknown to us, but we do know
that to think with lucidity and to act with
fairness is to aid those designs (which shall
never be revealed to us).
i want to die completely; i want to die with
this body, my companion.
his end and his beginning
the death throes done, he lay now alone—
alone and broken and rejected— and then he
sank into sleep. when he awoke, there awaited
him his commonplace habits and the places of
his everyday existence. he told himself that he
shouldn't think too much about the night
before, and, cheered by that resolve, he
unhurriedly dressed for work. at the office, he
got through his duties passably well, though
with that uneasy sense (caused by weariness) of 
repeating things he'd already done. he seemed
to notice that the others turned their eyes away;
perhaps they already knew that he was dead.
that night the nightmares began; he was left
without the slightest memory of them—just the
fear that they'd return. in time, that fear
prevailed; it came between him and the page he
was supposed to write, the books he tried to
read. letters would crawl about on the page like
ants; faces, familiar faces, gradually blurred and
faded, objects and people slowly abandoned
him. his mind seized upon those changing
shapes in a frenzy of tenacity.
however odd it may seem, he never
suspected the truth; it burst upon him
suddenly. he realized that he was unable to
remember the shapes, sounds, and colors of his
dreams; there were no shapes, colors, or
sounds, nor were the dreams dreams. they
were his reality, a reality beyond silence and
sight, and therefore beyond memory. this
realization threw him into even greater
consternation than the fact that from the hour
of his death he had been struggling in a
whirlwind of senseless images. the voices he'd
heard had been echoes; the faces he'd seen had
been masks; the fingers of his hands had been
shadows—vague and insubstantial, true, yet
also dear to him, and familiar.
somehow he sensed that it was his duty to
leave all these things be-hind; now he belonged
to this new world, removed from past, present,
and future. little by little this new world
surrounded him. he suffered many agonies,
journeyed through realms of desperation and
loneliness—appalling peregrinations, for they
transcended all his previous perceptions,
memories, and hopes. all horror lay in their
newness and their splendor. he had deserved
grace—he had earned it; every second since the
moment of his death, he had been in heaven. 
brodie's report (1970)
foreword
kipling's last stories were no less tortured
and labyrinthine than franz kafka's or henry
james's, which they unquestionably surpass; in
1885, though, in lahore, early in his career,
kipling began writing a series of brief tales
composed in a plain style, and he published
those stories in 1890. not a few of them—"in
the house of suddhoo," "beyond the pale,"
"the gate of the hundred sorrows"—are
laconic masterpieces; it has occurred to me
from time to time that that which a young man
of genius is capable of conceiving and bringing
to fruition, a man beginning to get along in
years and who knows his craft might, without
immodesty, himself attempt. the issue of that
reflection is contained in this volume; my
readers may judge it for themselves.
i have tried (i am not sure how successfully)
to write plain tales. i dare not say they are
simple; there is not a simple page, a simple
word, on earth—for all pages, all words,
predicate the universe, whose most notorious
attribute is its complexity. but i do wish to
make clear that i am not, nor have i ever been,
what used to be called a fabulist or spinner of
parables, what these days is called an auteur
engagé. i do not aspire to be æsop. my tales,
like those of the thousand and one nights, are
intended not to persuade readers, but to
entertain and touch them. this intention does
not mean that i shut myself, as solomon's
image would have it, into an ivory tower. my
convictions with respect to political matters are
well known; i have joined the conservative
party (which act is a form of skepticism), and
no one has ever called me a communist, a
nationalist, an anti-semite, or a supporter of
hormiga negra*or of rosas.* i believe that in
time we will have reached the point where we
will deserve to be free of government. i have
never hidden my opinions, even through the
difficult years, but i have never allowed them to
intrude upon my literary production, either,
save that one time when i praised the six-day
war. the craft is mysterious; our opinions are 
ephemeral, and i prefer plato's theory of the
muse to that of poe, who argued, or pretended
to argue, that the writing of a poem is an
operation of the intelligence. (i never cease to
be amazed that the classics professed a
romantic theory while a romantic poet
espoused a classical one.) aside from the text
that gives its name to this book (and whose
paternity, obviously, can be traced to lemuel
gulliver's last voyage), my stories are "realistic,"
to use a term that is fashionable these days.
they observe, i believe, all the conventions of
the genre (a genre no less convention-ridden
than all the others, and one we will soon
enough grow tired of, if we are not already).
they abound in the circumstantial details that
writers are required to invent—details that we
can find such splendid examples of in the tenthcentury
anglo-saxon ballad of the battle of
maldon and the icelandic sagas that came later.
two of the stories (i will not say which ones)
can be opened with the same fantastic key. the
curious reader will perceive certain secret
affinities among the tales. a mere handful of
arguments have haunted me all these years; i
am decidedly monotonous.
for the general outline of the story called
"the gospel according to mark," the best story
of the volume, i am indebted to a dream that
hugo ramirez moroni* had one night; i fear i
may have spoiled the dream with the changes
that my imagination (or my reason) deemed it
needed. but then literature is naught but guided
dreaming, anyway.
i have renounced the shocks of a baroque
style as well as those afforded by unforeseen or
unexpected endings. i have, in short, preferred
to prepare my readers for my endings, rather
than to astound them. for many years i
believed that it would be my fortune to achieve
literature through variations and novelties; now
that i am seventy years old i think i have found
my own voice. a word changed here or there
will neither spoil nor improve what i dictate,
except when those alterations succeed in
leavening a heavy sentence or softening an
emphasis. each language is a tradition, each
word a shared symbol; the changes that an
innovator may make are trifling—we should
remember the dazzling but often unreadable
work of a mallarmé or a joyce. these
reasonable, rational arguments are quite likely
the result of weariness; advanced age has
taught me to resign myself to being borges.
i care little about the diccionario de la real
academia ("dolt chaque édition fait regretter la
précédente” as paul grossac glumly remarked),
and equally little about these tiresome
dictionaries of argentinisms. all of them—on
both this side of the atlantic and the other—
tend to stress the differences between our
spanish and theirs, and thereby to disintegrate
the language. i recall that when somebody or
other scolded roberto arlt because he knew so
little about lunfardo, the putative language of
the buenos aires underworld, he answered his
critic in this way: "i was raised in villa luro,
among thugs and bullies and poor people, and i
really had very little time to study the way they
talked." lunfardo is, in fact, a literary put-on, a
language invented by composers of tangos and
writers of comedies for the stage and screen;
the lowlifes and thugs themselves, those who
lived in the tough, ragged outskirts of the city
and who are supposed to have created it and
used it in their daily lives, actually know
nothing about it, except what phonograph
records may have taught them.
i have set my stories at some distance in both
time and space. imagination has more freedom
to work, that way. today, in 1970, who can
recall exactly what those outskirts of palermo or
lomas were like at the end of the nineteenth
century? incredible as it may seem, there are
certain punctilious men and women who act as
a sort of "trivia police." they will note, for
example, that martín fierro would have talked
about a bag of bones, not a sack, and they will
criticize (perhaps unfairly, perhaps not) the
golden-pink coat of a certain horse famous in
our literature.*
god save you, reader, from long forewords.—
the quotation is from quevedo, who (not to
commit an anachronism that would have been
caught sooner or later) never read the prefaces
of shaw. 
j.l.b. buenos aires, april 19, 1970
the interloper
2 reyes 1:26*
they say (though it seems unlikely) that
eduardo, the younger of the nelson brothers,
told the story in eighteen-ninety-something at
the wake for cristian, the elder, who had died of
natural causes in the district of morón. what is
unquestionably true is that as the cups of mate
went their rounds in the course of that long
night when there was nothing else to do,
somebody heard it from someone and later
repeated it to santiago dabove, from whom i
first heard it. i was told the story again, years
later, in turdera, where it had actually
occurred. this second, somewhat less succinct
version corroborated the essential details of
santiago's, with the small divergences and
variations one always expects. i commit it to
writing now because i believe it affords us
(though i may of course be mistaken) a brief
and tragic window on the sort of men that once
fought their knife fights and lived their harsh
lives in the tough neighborhoods on the
outskirts of buenos aires. i will tell the story
conscientiously, though i can foresee myself
yielding to the literary temptation to heighten
or insert the occasional small detail.
in turdera they were known as the nilsens. i
was told by the parish priest that his
predecessor recalled having seen, not without
some surprise, a worn black-letter bible in the
house; on its last pages he had glimpsed
handwritten names and dates. that blackbound
volume was the only book they owned—
its troubled chronicle of the nilsens is now lost,
as everything will one day be lost. the big
ramshackle house (which is no longer standing)
was of unplastered brick; from the entryway
one could see a first interior patio of red tiles
and another, farther back, of packed earth. few
people, however, entered that entryway; the
nilsens defended their solitude. they slept on
cots in dilapidated and unfurnished bedrooms; 
their luxuries were horses, saddles, shortbladed
daggers, flashy saturday night clothes,
and the alcohol that made them belligerent. i
know that they were tall, with reddish hair—the
blood of denmark or ireland (countries whose
names they probably never heard) flowed in the
veins of those two criollos. the neighborhood
was afraid of the redheads, as they were called;
it is not impossible that one or another killing
had been their work. once they had stood
shoulder to shoulder and fought it out with the
police. people say the younger brother had once
traded words with juan iberra and not gone
away with the worst of it—which according to
those who knew about such things was saying a
great deal. they were cattle drivers, teamsters,
horse thieves, and sometime cardsharps. they
had a reputation for tightfisted-ness, except
when drinking and gambling made them
generous. about their kinspeople, nothing is
known even of where they came from. they
owned an oxcart and a yoke of oxen.
physically, they were unlike the toughs that
gave costa brava its reputation for lawlessness. 
that, and things we have no certain knowledge
of, may help us understand how close they
were. having a falling-out with one of them was
earning yourself two enemies.
the nilsens were men who sought the
pleasures of the flesh, but their romantic
episodes had so far been on porches or in
entryways or houses of ill repute. there was a
good deal of talk, therefore, when cristian
carried juliana burgos home to live with him.
the truth was, in doing so he had gained a
servant, but it was also true that he lavished
ghastly trinkets upon her and showed her off at
parties—those shabby little tenement house
par-ties where certain tango steps (the
quebrada and the corte, for example) were
considered indecent and weren't allowed, and
where couples still danced "with a good bit of
daylight between them," as the saying went.
juliana had almond eyes and dark skin;
whenever someone looked at her she smiled. in
a humble neighborhood, where work and
neglect make women old before their time, she
was not bad-looking. 
at first, eduardo lived with them. then he
went off to arrecifes on some business, and on
his return he brought a girl home with him, too;
he had picked her up on the road. within a few
days he threw her out. he grew ever more
sullen and bad-tempered; he would get drunk
by himself in the corner general-store-and-bar
and would not answer when someone spoke to
him. he was in love with cristian's woman. the
neighborhood (which probably knew that
before he himself did) sensed with secret and
perfidious delight the latent rivalry that
throbbed between the brothers.
one night, coming home late from a bout of
drinking, eduardo saw cristian's black horse
tied to the post at the front of the house.
cristian was sitting waiting for him in the patio;
he was wearing his best clothes.
the woman was walking about the house
with her mate in her hand.
"i'm going off to that bust over at farias'
place. there's juliana—if you want her, use
her."
his tone was half-peremptory, half-cordial.
eduardo stood for a moment looking at him; he
didn't know what to do. cristian stood up, said
good-bye to eduardo—not to juliana, who was
a mere thing—mounted his horse, and rode off
at an unhurried trot.
from that night onward, they shared her. no
one will ever know the details of that sordid
ménage, which outraged the neighborhood's
sense of decency. the arrangement went well
for a few weeks, but it couldn't last. never,
when the three of them were in the house, did
the brothers speak juliana's name, even to call
her, but they looked for—and found—reasons to
disagree. they bickered over the sale price of a
load of skins, but it was something else they
were really arguing about. cristián's tendency
was to raise his voice; eduardo's, to fall silent.
without knowing it, they were jealous of each
other. in those hard-bitten outskirts of the city,
a man didn't say, nor was it said about him, that
a woman mattered to him (beyond desire and
ownership), but the two brothers were in fact in
love. they felt humiliated by that, somehow.
one afternoon in the lomastown plaza,
eduardo ran into juan iberra, who
congratulated him on that beauty he'd found
himself. it was then, i think, that eduardo gave
him a tongue-lashing. nobody, in eduardo's
presence, was going to make cristian the butt of
such jokes.
the woman saw to the needs of both
brothers with beastlike submissiveness,
although she couldn't hide some preference for
the younger, who had not refused to take part in
the arrangement but hadn't initiated it, either.
one day, the brothers ordered juliana to take
two chairs out into the first patio and then
make herself scarce; the two of them needed to
talk. she was expecting a long talk, so she lay
down for her siesta, but soon they called her
back. they had her put everything she owned,
even the rosary of glass beads and the little
crucifix her mother had left her, in a sack.
without a word of explanation, they loaded her
onto the oxcart and set off on a tedious and
silent journey. it had rained; the roads were
heavy, and it was sometime around five in the
morning when they finally reached morón.
there, they woke up the madam of a
whorehouse and offered to sell her juliana. the
deal was struck; cristian took the money, and
divided it later with eduardo.
back in turdera, the nilsens, who had been
entangled in the thicket (which was also the
routine) of that monstrous love, tried to take up
their old life as men among men. they returned
to their games of truco, their cockfights, their
casual binges. they thought, once in a while,
perhaps, that they were saved, but then,
separately, they began to take unexplained (or
overexplained) absences. shortly before the end
of the year, eduardo announced that he had
business in the capital, and he rode away. when
he had gone, cristian took the road to morón;
there, tied to the hitching post of the house
which the story would lead us to expect, was
eduardo's pinto. cristian went in; eduardo was
inside, waiting his turn.
cristian, it seems, said to him. "if we keep on
this way much longer, we're going to wear out
the horses. maybe we ought to have her where
we can get at her." 
he spoke to the madam, pulled some coins
out of his purse, and they took juliana away
with them. she rode with cristian; eduardo put
spurs to his palomino so he wouldn't have to
see them.
they went back to the old arrangement.
their abominable solution had failed; both of
them had given in to the temptation to cheat.
cain lurked about, but the love between the
nilsens was great (who can say what hardships
and dangers they had shared!) and they chose
to take their exasperation out on others: a
stranger—the dogs—juliana, who had
introduced the seed of discord.
the month of march was nearing its close
but the heat dragged on relentlessly. one
sunday (on sunday people tended to call it a
day early), eduardo, who was coming home
from the bar, saw that cristian was yoking up
the oxen.
"come on,"cristian said, "we've got to take
some skins over to the nigger's place. i've
already loaded them up—we can go in the cool
of the evening." 
the nigger's store lay a little south of the
nilsens' place, i believe: they took the troop
road, then turned off onto a road that was not
so heavily traveled. the countryside grew larger
and larger as the night came on.
they were driving along beside a field
covered in dried-out straw; cristian threw out
the cigar he had lighted and stopped the oxcart.
"let's go to work, brother. the buzzards'll
come in to clean up after us. i killed'er today.
we'll leave'er here, her and her fancy clothes.
she won't cause any more hurt."
almost weeping, they embraced. now they
were linked by yet another bond: the woman
grievously sacrificed, and the obligation to
forget her.
unworthy
the picture of the city that we carry in our
mind is always slightly out of date. the café has
degenerated into a bar; the vestibule that
allowed us a glimpse of patio and grapevine is
now a blurred hallway with an elevator down at
the far end. thus, for years i thought that a
certain bookstore, the librería buenos aires,
would be awaiting me at a certain point along
calle talcahuano, but then one morning i
discovered that an antiques shop had taken the
bookstore's place, and i was told that don
santiago fischbein, the owner of the bookstore,
had died. fischbein had tended toward the
obese; his features are not as clear in my
memory as our long conversations are. firmly
yet coolly he would condemn zionism—it would
make the jew an ordinary man, he said, tied
like all other men to a single tradition and a
single country, and bereft of the complexities
and discords that now enrich him. i recall that
he once told me that a new edition of the works
of baruch spinoza was being prepared, which
would banish all that euclidean apparatus that
makes spinoza's work so difficult to read yet at
the same time imparts an illusory sense of rigor
to the fantastic theory. fischbein showed me
(though he refused to sell me) a curious copy of 
rosenroth's kabbala de-nudata, but my
library does contain some books by ginsburg
and waite that bear fischbein's seal.
one afternoon when the two of us were
alone, he confided to me an episode of his life,
and today i can tell it. i will change the
occasional detail—as is only to be expected.
i am going to tell you about something
(fischbein began) that i have never told anyone
before. my wife ana doesn't know about this,
nor do my closest friends. it happened so many
years ago that it no longer feels like my own
experience. maybe you can use it for a story—no
doubt you'll endow it with a knife fight or two. i
don't know whether i've ever mentioned that
i'm from entre ríos. i won't tell you that we
were jewish gauchos—there were never any
jewish gauchos. we were merchants and small
farmers. i was born in urdinarrain, which i
only barely remember; when my parents came
to buenos aires, to open a shop, i was just a
little boy. the maldonado was a few blocks
from us, and then came the empty lots.
carlyle wrote that men need heroes. grosso's 
history suggested that san martin might be a
fit object of worship, but all i ever saw in san
martin was a soldier who'd waged war in chile
and who'd now become a bronze statue and
given his name to a plaza. chance dealt me a
very different hero, to the misfortune of us
both: francisco ferrari. this is probably the
first time you've ever heard of him.
our neighborhood was not a bad one, the
way los corrales and el bajo were said to be,
but every corner grocery-store-and-bar had its
gang of toughs. ferrari hung out in the one at
triunvirato and thames. that was where the
incident happened that led me to be one of his
followers. i'd gone in to buy some yerba for the
mate. a stranger with long hair and a mustache
came in and ordered a gin.
"say"—ferrari's voice was as smooth as silk—
"didn't i see you last night at the dance at
juliana's?
where're you from?"
"san cristobal," the other man replied.
"well, i'll tell you for your own good," ferrari
said to him, "you ought to stay up there. there 
are people in this neighborhood that are liable
to give you a hard time."
the man from san cristóbal left, mustache
and all. he may have been no less a man than
ferrari, but he knew he was up against the
whole gang.
from that afternoon on, francisco ferrari
was the hero that my fifteen-year-old heart
yearned for. he had black hair and was rather
tall, good-looking—handsome in the style of
those days. he always wore black. it was a
second episode that actually brought us
together. i was walking along with my mother
and my aunt when we came upon some street
toughs, and one of them said loudly to the
others:
"let the old hens through. meat's too gristly
to eat."
i didn't know what to do. but ferrari, who
was just coming out of his house, stepped in. he
stood face to face with one who'd spoken, and
he said:
"if you boys feel like picking a fight with
somebody, why don't you pick a fight with me?" 
he walked down the line, slowly, one by one,
but nobody said a word.
they knew him. he shrugged his shoulders,
waved at us, and walked away. but before he
left, he said to me:
"if you're not doing anything later on, stop
by the joint." i stood there unnerved and
shaken. sarah, my aunt, issued her verdict: "a
gentleman that demands respect for ladies."
to save me from the spot that put me in, my
mother corrected her: "i would say, rather, a
ruffian who won't allow competition." i don't
know how to explain it to you. today i've carved
out a place for myself. i have this bookstore that
i enjoy and whose books i read; i have
friendships, like ours; i have my wife and
children; i've joined the socialist party—i'm a
good argentine and a good jew. i am respected
and respectable. the man you see now is almost
bald; at that time i was a poor jewish kid with
red hair in a tough neighborhood on the
outskirts of the city. people looked askance at
me. i tried, as all young fellows do, to be like
everyone else. i had started calling myself
santiago to make the jacob go away, but there
was nothing i could do about the fischbein. we
all come to resemble the image others have of
us; i sensed people's contempt for me, and i felt
contempt for myself as well. at that time, and
especially in that setting, it was important to be
brave; i knew myself to be a coward. women
intimidated me; deep down, i was ashamed of
my fainthearted chastity. i had no friends my
own age.
i didn't go to the corner bar that night. i wish
i'd never gone. but little by little i became
convinced that the invitation was an order. one
saturday after dinner, i went in.
ferrari was presiding over one of the tables. i
knew the others' faces; there were probably
seven, all told. ferrari was the oldest one there,
except for one old man of few words, and weary
ones, whose name is the only one that from my
memory has not faded: don elíseo amaro. a
knife scar crossed his face, which was very
broad and slack. i learned sometime later that
he'd once been in prison for something....
ferrari had me sit at his left; don elíseo had 
to change seats. i was nervous. i was afraid
ferrari would make some allusion to the
unfortunate incident of a few days before, you
see. but nothing of the sort happened; they
talked about women, cards, elections, an
itinerant singer that was supposed to come but
never did—the things going on in the
neighborhood. at first it was hard for them to
swallow the little red-haired jewish kid; they
finally did, though, because ferrari wanted it
that way. in spite of their names, which were
mostly italian, they all felt themselves (and
were felt to be) native argentines, even
gauchos. some were teamsters or cart drivers,
and there may even have been a butcher; their
work with animals gave them a bond with the
country people. i suspect that they wished more
than anything that they had been born juan
moreira. they wound up calling me little
sheeny, but there was no contempt in the
nickname. i learned from those men how to
smoke, and other things.
one night in one of the houses on calle
junín, someone asked me if i wasn't a friend of 
francisco ferrari's. i shook my head—i felt i
would be al-most bragging if i said yes.
the police came into the bar one night and
frisked everyone. several of us were taken to the
police station—but they didn't mess with
ferrari. two weeks later the scene was
repeated; this second time, they arrested
ferrari too. he had a dagger in his belt. he may
have fallen out of favor with the ward boss.
today i see ferrari as a poor kid misguided
and betrayed; at the time, in my eyes, a god he
was.
friendship, you know, is as mysterious as
love or any other state of this confusion we call
life. in fact, i have sometimes suspected that
the only thing that holds no mystery is
happiness, because it is its own justification.
however that may be, the fact was that
francisco ferrari, the daring, strong ferrari,
felt a sense of friendship for me, contemptible
me. i felt he was mistaken, that i was not
worthy of that friendship. i tried to avoid him,
but he wouldn't let me. my anxiety was made
worse by my mother's disapproval; she could
not resign herself to my associating with what
she called "the riffraff," nor to the fact that i'd
begun to ape them. the essential element in the
story i am telling you, though, is my
relationship with ferrari, not the sordid events
themselves, which i do not now regret. "so long
as regret lasts, guilt lasts."
one night i came into the bar to find the old
man, don eliseo, who had taken his place again
beside ferrari, in whispered conversation with
him. they were plotting something. from the
other end of the table, i thought i heard the
name weidemann—weidemann's weaving mill
stood on the out-skirts of the neighborhood. in
a few minutes ferrari and don eliseo sent me
off to have a look around the factory. i was
given no explanation, but i was told to pay
special attention to the doors. night was falling
when i crossed the maldonado and the railroad
tracks. i recall a few scattered houses, a stand of
willow trees, and vacant lots. the factory was
new, but it had a soli-tary, seedy look about it;
in my memory now, its reddish color mingles
with the sunset. there was a fence around it.
besides the main door, there were two doors in
back, facing south, that opened directly into the
workshops.
i confess it took me some time to grasp what
i imagine you've already grasped. i made my
report, which one of the other kids
corroborated—his sister worked in the factory.
if the gang had missed a saturday night at the
bar, everyone would have remembered, so
ferrari decided the robbery would take place
the next friday. i was to be the lookout.
meanwhile, it was best that no one see us
together.
when we were alone together in the street
outside, i asked ferrari whether he really
trusted me with this mission.
"yes," he said. "i know you'll comport
yourself like a man."
i slept well that night, and the nights that
followed as well. on wednesday i told my
mother i was going downtown to see a new
cowboy movie. i put on the best clothes i owned
and set off for calle moreno.
the trip on the streetcar was a long one. at 
the police station they made me wait, but finally
one of the clerks, a man named eald or alt,
would see me. i told him i had come to discuss
a confidential matter.
he told me i could speak freely. i told him
what ferrari was planning to do. i was
astounded that the name was unknown to him;
it was another thing when i mentioned don
elíseo.
"ah!" he said, "he was one of the
uruguayan's gang."
eald or alt sent for another officer, one
assigned to my precinct, and the two of them
consulted. one of them asked me, not with
sarcasm:
"are you making this accusation because you
think you're a good citizen? is that it?"
i didn't feel he'd understand, so i answered.
"yes, sir. i am a good argentine."
they told me to carry out the orders the
leader of my gang had given me, all except the
part about whistling when i saw the police
coming. as i was leaving, one of them warned
me:
"be careful. you know what happens to
squealers."
police officers love to show off their
lunfardo, like fourth graders.
"i hope they kill me," i answered. "it's the
best thing that could happen to me."
beginning early friday morning and all
throughout that day, i was filled with a sense of
relief that the day had come at last, and of
remorse at feeling no remorse whatever. the
hours seemed endless. i barely touched my
food. at ten that night we began gathering, less
than a block from the factory. there was one of
us that didn't come; don eliseo said there was
always one washout. it occurred to me that the
blame for what was to happen would fall on the
absent man. it was about to rain. i was afraid
that one of the others might stay behind with
me, but i was left by myself at one of the back
doors. pretty soon the police came, an officer
and several patrolmen. they came on foot, for
stealth; they had left their horses in a field.
ferrari had forced the factory door, so the
police were able to slip inside without a sound. 
then i was stunned to hear four shots. there
inside, in the darkness, i thought, they were
killing each other. then i saw the police come
out with the men in handcuffs. then two more
policemen emerged, dragging the bodies of
francisco ferrari and don eliseo amaro, who'd
been shot at point-blank range. in their report
the police said the robbers had failed to halt
when they were ordered, and that ferrari and
don eliseo had fired the first shots. i knew that
was a lie, because i had never seen either of
them with a revolver. the police had taken
advantage of the occasion to settle an old score.
days later, i was told that ferrari tried to get
away, but one shot was all it took. the
newspapers, of course, made him the hero that
perhaps he never was, but that i had dreamed
of.
i was arrested with the others, but a short
while later they let me go. 
the story from rosendo juárez
it was about eleven o'clock one night; i had
gone into the old-fashioned general-store-andbar,
which is now simply a bar, on the corner of
bolivar and venezuela. as i went in, i noticed
that over in a corner, sitting at one of the little
tables, was a man i had never seen before. he
hissed to catch my eye and motioned me to
come over. he must have looked like a man that
one didn't want to cross, because i went at once
toward his table. i felt, inexplicably, that he had
been sitting there for some time, in that chair,
before that empty glass. he was neither tall nor
short; he looked like an honest craftsman, or
perhaps an old-fashioned country fellow. his
sparse mustache was grizzled. a bit stiff, as
porteños tend to be, he had not taken off his
neck scarf. he offered to buy me a drink; i sat
down and we chatted.
all this happened in nineteen-thirtysomething.

"you've heard of me, sir, though we've never
met," the man began, "but i know you. my
name is rosendo juárez. it was nicolás
paredes, no doubt, god rest his soul, that told
you about me. that old man was something. i'll
tell you—the stories he'd tell... not so as to fool
anyone, of course—just to be entertaining. but
since you and i are here with nothing else on
our hands just now, i'd like to tell you what
really happened that night... the night the
yardmaster was murdered. you've put the story
in a novel, sir— and i'm hardly qualified to
judge that novel—but i want you to know the
truth behind the lies you wrote."
he paused, as though to put his recollections
in order, and then he began....
things happen to a man, you see, and a man
only understands them as the years go by. what
happened to me that night had been waiting to
happen for a long time. i was brought up in the
neighborhood of the maldonado,* out beyond
floresta. it was one big open sewage ditch back
then, if you know what i mean, but fortunately
they've run sewer lines in there now. i've always
been of the opinion that nobody has the right to
stand in the way of progress. you just do the
best you can with the hand you're dealt....
it never occurred to me to find out the name
of the father that begot me. clementina juárez,
my mother, was a good honest woman that
earned her living with her iron. if you were to
ask me, i'd say she was from entre ríos or the
banda oriental, what people now call uruguay;
be that as it may, she would always talk about
her relatives over in uruguay, in concepción.
for myself, i grew up the best i could. i learned
to knife fight with the other boys, using a
charred piece of stick. that was before we were
all taken over by soccer, which back at that time
was still just something the english did.
anyway, while i was sitting in the bar one
night, this fellow named garmendia started
trying to pick a fight with me. i ignored him for
a while— playing deaf, you might say—but this
garmendia, who was feeling his liquor, kept
egging me on. we finally took it outside; out on
the sidewalk, garmendia turned back a second,
pushed the door open again a little, and
announced—"not to worry, boys, i'll be right
back." 
i had borrowed a knife. we walked down
toward the maldonado, slow, watching each
other. he was a few years older than i was; he
and i had practiced knife fighting together lots
of times, and i had a feeling i was going to get
positively gutted. i was walking down the righthand
side of the alley, and him down the left.
suddenly, he tripped over some big chunks of
cement that were lying there. the second he
tripped, i jumped him, almost without thinking
about it. i cut his cheek open with one slash,
then we locked together—there was a second
when anything could've happened— and then i
stabbed him once, which was all it took.... it was
only sometime later that i realized he'd left his
mark on me, too—scratches, though, that was
about it. i learned that night that it isn't hard to
kill a man, or get killed yourself. the creek was
down; to keep the body from being found too
soon, i half-hid it behind a brick kiln. i was so
stunned i suppose i just stopped thinking,
because i slipped off the ring garmendia always
wore and put it on. then i straightened my hat
and went back to the bar. i walked in as easy as 
you please.
"looks like it's me that's come back," i said.
i ordered a shot of brandy, and the truth is, i
needed it. that was when somebody pointed
out the bloodstain.
that night i tossed and turned on my bunk
all night; i didn't fall asleep till nearly dawn.
about the time of early mass, two cops came
looking for me. you should have seen the way
my mother carried on, may she rest in peace,
poor thing. i was dragged off like a criminal.
two days and two nights i sat in that stinking
cell. nobody came to visit me—except for luis
irala, a true friend if ever there was one. but
they wouldn't let him see me. then one
morning the captain sent for me. he was sitting
there in his chair; he didn't even look at me at
first, but he did speak.
"so you put garmendia out of his misery?"
he said.
"if you say so," i answered.
"it's 'sir' to you. and we'll have no ducking or
dodging, now. here are the statements from the
witnesses, and here's the ring that was found in 
your house. just sign the confession and get
this over with."
he dipped the pen in the inkwell and handed
it to me.
"let me think about this, captain—sir," i
added.
"i'll give you twenty-four hours to think
about it real good, in your very own cell. i won't
rush you. but if you decide not to see things in a
reasonable way, you'd best start getting used to
the idea of a vacation down on calle las heras."
as you might imagine, i didn't understand
that right away.
"if you decide to come around, you'll just be
in for a few days. i'll let you go—don nicolás
paredes has promised me he'll fix it for you."
but it was ten days. i'd almost given up hope
when they finally remembered me. i signed
what they put in front of me to sign and one of
the cops took me over to calle cabrera....*
there were horses tied to the hitching post,
and standing out on the porch and all inside the
place there were more people than a saturday
night at the whorehouse. it looked like a party 
committee headquarters. don nicolás, who was
sipping at a mate, finally called me over. as
calm as you please, he told me he was going to
send me out to morón, where they were setting
up for the elections. he told me to look up a
certain sr. laferrer; he'd try me out, he said.
the letter i was to take was written by a kid in
black that wrote poems about tenement houses
and riffraff—or anyway, that's what i was told. i
can't imagine that educated people would be
much interested in that sort of thing, much less
if it's told in poetry. anyway, i thanked paredes
for the favor, and i left. the cop didn't stay so
infernally glued to me on the way back.
so it all turned out for the best. providence
knows what it's doing. garmendia's killing,
which at first had got me in such hot water, was
now starting to open doors for me. of course
the cops had me over a barrel—if i didn't work
out, if i didn't toe the line for the party, i'd be
hauled in again. but i'd got some heart back,
and i had faith in myself.
laferrer warned me right off that i was going
to have to walk the straight and narrow with
him, but if i did, he said, he might make me his
bodyguard. the work i did for'em was all
anyone could ask.
in morón, and later on in the neighborhood
too, i gradually won my bosses' trust. the police
and the party gradually spread the word that i
was a man to be reckoned with; i was an
important cog in the wheels of the elections in
buenos aires, and out in the province too.
elections were fierce back then; i won't bore
you, señor, with stories about the blood that
would be shed. i did all i could to make life hard
on the radicals, though to this day they're still
riding on alem's coattails. but as i say, there
was no man that didn't show me respect. i got
myself a woman, la lujanera we called her, and
a handsome copper sorrel. for years i
pretended to be some kind of moreira—who in
his day was probably imitating some other stage
show gaucho. i played a lot of cards and drank a
lot of absinthe....
we old folks talk and talk and talk, i know,
but i'm coming to what i wanted to tell you. i
don't know if i mentioned luis irala. a true
friend, the likes of which you'll not often find....
he was getting on in years when i knew him,
and he'd never been afraid of hard work; for
some reason he took a liking to me.
he'd never set foot in a committee room—he
earned his living carpentering. he didn't stick
his nose in anybody else's business, and he
didn't let anybody stick their nose in his. one
morning he came to see me.
"i guess you've heard casilda left me," he
said."rufino aguilerais, the man that took her
away from me."
i'd had dealings with that particular
individual in morón.
"i know rufino,"i told him. "i'd have to say
that of all the aguileras, * he's the least
disgusting."
"disgusting or not, i've got a bone to pick
with him."
i thought for a minute.
"listen," i finally told him, "nobody takes
anything away from anybody. if casilda left
you, it's because it's rufino she wants, and she's
not interested in you." 
"but what'll people say? that i'm yellow?
that i don't stand up to a man that wrongs
me?"
"my advice to you is not to go looking for
trouble because of what people might say, let
alone because of a woman that doesn't love you
anymore."
"i couldn't care less about her," he said. "a
man that thinks longer than five minutes
running about a woman is no man, he's a pansy.
and casilda's heartless, anyway. the last night
we spent together she told me i was getting
old."
"she was telling you the truth."
"and it hurts, but it's beside the point—
rufino's the one i'm after now."
"you want to be careful there," i told him.
"i've seen rufino in action, in the merlo
elections. he's like greased lightning."
"you think i'm afraid of rufino aguilera?"
" i know you're not afraid of him, but think
about it—one of two things will happen: either
you kill him and you get sent off to stir, or he
kills you and you get sent off to chacarita."*
"one of two things. so tell me, what would
you do in my place?"
"i don't know, but then i'm not exactly the
best example to follow. i'm a guy that to get his
backside out of jail has turned into a gorilla for
the party."
"i'm not planning to turn into a gorilla for
the party, i'm planning to collect a debt a man
owes me."
"you mean you're going to stake your peace
of mind on a stranger you've never met and a
woman you don't even love anymore?"
but luis irala wasn't interested in hearing
what i had to say, so he left. the next day we
heard that he'd picked a fight with rufino in
some bar over in morón and that rufino had
killed him.
he went off to get killed, and he got himself
killed right honorably, too—man to man. i'd
done the best i could, i'd given him a friend's
advice, but i still felt guilty.
a few days after the wake, i went to the
cockfights. i'd never been all that keen on
cockfights, but that sunday, i'll tell you the
truth, they made me sick. what in the world's
wrong with those animals, i thought, that they
tear each other to pieces this way, for no good
reason?
the night of this story i'm telling you, the
night of the end of the story, the boys and i had
all gone to a dance over at the place that a black
woman we called la pardaran. funny—all these
years, and i still remember the flowered dress
la lujanera was wearing that night.... the party
was out in the patio.
there was the usual drunk trying to pick a
fight, but i made sure things went the way they
were supposed to go. it was early, couldn't have
been midnight yet, when the strangers showed
up. one of them—they called him the
yardmaster, and he was stabbed in the back
and killed that very night, just the way you
wrote it, sir—anyway, this one fellow bought a
round of drinks for the house. by coincidence
this yardmaster and i were dead ringers for
each other. he had something up his sleeve that
night: he came up to me and started laying it on
pretty thick—he was from up north, he said,
and he'd been hearing about me. he couldn't
say enough about my reputation. i let him talk,
but i was beginning to suspect what was
coming, he was hitting the gin hard, too, and i
figured it was to get his courage up—and sure
enough, pretty soon he challenged me to a fight.
that was when it happened—what nobody
wants to understand. i looked at that
swaggering drunk just spoiling for a fight, and it
was like i was looking at myself in a mirror, and
all of a sudden i was ashamed of myself. i
wasn't afraid of him; if i had been, i might've
gone outside and fought him. i just stood there.
this other guy, this yardmaster, who by now
had his face about this far from mine, raised his
voice so everybody could hear him:
"you know what's wrong with you? you're
yellow, that's what's wrong with you!"
"that may be," i said. "i can live with being
called yellow. you can tell people you called me
a son of a whore, too, and say i let you spit in
my face. now then, does that make you feel
better?"
la lujanera slipped her hand up my sleeve 
and pulled out the knife i always carried there
and slipped it into my hand. and to make sure i
got the message, she also said, "rosendo, i
think you're needing this."
her eyes were blazing.
i dropped the knife and walked out—taking
my time about it. people stepped back to make
way for me. they couldn't believe their eyes.
what did i care what they thought.
to get out of that life, i moved over to
uruguay and became an oxcart driver. since i
came back, i've made my place here. san telmo
has always been a peaceful place to live.
the encounter
for susana bombai
those who read the news each morning do so
simply to forget it again, or for the sake of the
evening's conversation, and so it should
surprise no one that people no longer
remember, or remember as though in a dream, 
the once-famous and much-discussed case of
maneco uriarte and a man named duncan.
of course the event took place in 1910, the
year of the comet and the centennial, and we
have had and lost so many things since
then-----the protagonists are dead now;
those who were witness to the
event swore an oath of solemn silence. i too
raised my hand to swear, and i felt, with all the
romantic seriousness of my nine or ten years,
the gravity of that rite. i can't say whether the
others noticed that i gave my word; i can't say
whether they kept their own. however that may
be, this is the story—with the inevitable changes
that time, and good (or bad) literature,
occasion.
that evening, my cousin lafinur had taken
me to an asado, one of those gatherings of men
with the roasting of the fatted calf (or lamb, as it
turned out to be), at a country place called los
laureles. i cannot describe the topography; we
should picture a town in the north of the
country— peaceful and shady, and sloping
down gently toward the river—rather than some 
flat, sprawling city. the journey by train lasted
long enough for me to find it boring, but
childhood's time, as we all know, flows slowly.
dusk had begun to settle when we drove
through the gate to the large country house.
there, i sensed, were the ancient elemental
things: the smell of the meat as it turned golden
on the spit, the trees, the dogs, the dry
branches, the fire that brings men together.
there were no more than a dozen guests, all
adults. (the oldest, i discovered later, was not
yet thirty.) they were learned, i soon realized,
in subjects that to this day i am unworthy of:
racehorses, tailoring, automobiles, notoriously
expensive women. no one disturbed my
shyness, no one paid any mind to me.
the lamb, prepared with slow skillfulness by
one of the peons that worked on the estate, held
us long in the dining room. the dates of the
wines were discussed. there was a guitar; my
cousin, i think i recall, sang elias regules' la
tapera and el gaucho and a few décimas in
lunfardo,*which was de rigueur back then—
verses about a knife fight in one of those houses 
on calle junín.*coffee was brought in, and
cigars.
not a word
about heading back home. i felt, as lugones
once put it, "the fear of the late-ness of the
hour." i couldn't bring myself to look at the
clock. to hide the loneliness i felt at being a boy
among men, i drank down, without much
pleasure, a glass or two of wine. suddenly,
uriarte loudly challenged dun-can to a game of
poker, just the two of them, mano a mano.
someone objected that two-handed poker
usually was a sorry sort of game, and suggested
a table of four. duncan was in favor of that, but
uriarte, with an obstinacy that i didn't
understand (and didn't try to), insisted that it
be just the two of them. outside of truco(whose
essential purpose is to fill time with verses and
good-natured mischief) and the modest
labyrinths of solitaire, i have never cared much
for cards. i slipped out of the room without
anyone's noticing.
a big house that one has never been in
before, its rooms in darkness (there was light
only in the dining room), means more to a boy
than an un-explored country to a traveler. step
by step i explored the house; i recall a billiard
room, a conservatory with glass panes of
rectangles and lozenges, a pair of rocking
chairs, and a window from which there was a
glimpse of a gazebo. in the dimness, i became
lost; the owner of the house—whose name, after
all these years, might have been acevedo or
acebal—finally found me. out of kindness, or,
being a collector, out of vanity, he led me to a
sort of museum case.
when he turned on the light, i saw that it
contained knives of every shape and kind,
knives made famous by the circumstances of
their use. he told me he had a little place near
pergamino, and that he had gathered his
collection over years of traveling back and forth
through the province. he opened the case and
without looking at the little show cards for each
piece he recounted the knives' histories, which
were always more or less the same, with
differences of place and date. i asked if among
his knives he had the dagger that had been
carried by moreira*(at that time the very
archetype of the gaucho, as martín fierro and
don segundo sombra*would later be). he had
to admit he didn't, but he said he could show
me one like it, with the same u-shaped cross
guard. angry voices interrupted him. he closed
the case immediately; i followed him.
uriarte was shouting that duncan had been
cheating. the others were standing around
them. duncan, i recall, was taller than the
others; he was a sturdy-looking, inexpressive
man a bit heavy in the shoulders, and his hair
was so blond that it was almost white. maneco
uriarte was a man of many nervous gestures
and quick movements; he was dark, with
features that revealed, perhaps, some trace of
indian blood, and a sparse, petulant mustache.
clearly, they were all drunk; i cannot say for
certain whether there were two or three bottles
scattered about on the floor or whether the
cinematographer's abuses have planted that
false memory in my mind. uriarte's cutting
(and now obscene) insults never ceased.
duncan seemed not to hear him; finally he
stood up, as though weary, and hit uriarte,
once, in the face. uriarte screamed—from the
floor where he now lay sprawling—that he was
not going to tolerate such an affront, and he
challenged duncan to fight.
duncan shook his head.
"to tell the truth, i'm afraid of you," he
added, by way of explanation.
a general burst of laughter greeted this.
"you're going to fight me, and now," uriarte
replied, once more on his feet.
someone, god forgive him, remarked that
there was no lack of weapons.
i am not certain who opened the vitrine.
maneco uriarte selected the longest and
showiest knife, the one with the u-shaped cross
guard; duncan, almost as though any one of
them would serve as well as any other, chose a
wood-handled knife with the figure of a little
tree on the blade. someone said it was like
maneco to choose a sword. no one was
surprised that maneco's hand should be
shaking at such a moment; everyone was
surprised to see that duncan's was. 
tradition demands that when men fight a
duel, they not sully the house they are in, but go
outside for their encounter. half in sport, half
serious, we went out into the humid night. i was
not drunk from wine, but i was drunk from the
adventure; i yearned for someone to be killed,
so that i could tell about it later, and remember
it. perhaps just then the others were no more
adult than 1.1 also felt that a whirlpool we
seemed incapable of resisting was pulling us
down, and that we were about to be lost. no one
really took maneco's accusation seriously;
everyone interpreted it as stemming from some
old rivalry, tonight exacerbated by the wine.
we walked through the woods that lay out
beyond the gazebo. uriarte and duncan were
ahead of us; i thought it odd that they should
watch each other the way they did, as though
each feared a surprise move by the other. we
came to a grassy patch.
"this place looks all right," duncan said with
soft authority.
the two men stood in the center indecisively.
"throw down that hardware—it just gets in 
the way. wrestle each other down for real!" a
voice shouted.
but by then the men were fighting. at first
they fought clumsily, as though afraid of being
wounded; at first they watched their opponent's
blade, but then they watched his eyes. uriarte
had forgotten about his anger; duncan, his
indifference or disdain. danger had
transfigured them; it was now two men, not two
boys, that were fighting. i had imagined a knife
fight as a chaos of steel, but i was able to follow
it, or almost follow it, as though it were a game
of chess. time, of course, has not failed both to
exalt and to obscure what i saw. i am not sure
how long it lasted; there are events that cannot
be held to ordinary measures of time.
as their forearms (with no ponchos wrapped
around them for protection) blocked the
thrusts, their sleeves, soon cut to ribbons, grew
darker and darker with their blood. it struck me
that we'd been mistaken in assuming they were
unfamiliar with the knife. i began to see that the
two men handled their weapons differently. the
weapons were unequal; to overcome that
disadvantage, duncan tried to stay close to the
other man, while uriarte drew away in order to
make long, low thrusts.
"they're killing each other! stop them!" cried
the same voice that had mentioned the
showcase.
no one summoned the courage to intervene.
uriarte had lost ground; duncan then charged
him. their bodies were almost touching now.
uriarte's blade sought duncan's face. abruptly
it looked shorter; it had plunged into his chest.
duncan lay on the grass. it was then that he
spoke, his voice barely audible:
"how strange. all this is like a dream."
he did not close his eyes, he did not move,
and i had seen one man kill another.
maneco uriarte leaned down to the dead
man and begged him to forgive him. he was
undisguisedly sobbing. the act he had just
committed overwhelmed and terrified him. i
now know that he regretted less having
committed a crime than having committed an
act of senselessness.
i couldn't watch anymore. what i had longed 
to see happen had happened, and i was
devastated.
lafinur later told me that they had to wrestle
with the body to pull the knife out. a council
was held among them, and they decided to lie
as little as possible; the knife fight would be
elevated to a duel with swords. four of the men
would claim to have been the seconds, among
them acebal.everything would be taken care of
in buenos aires; somebody always has a
friend....
on the mahogany table lay a confusion of
playing cards and bills that no one could bring
himself to look at or touch.
in the years that followed, i thought more
than once about confiding the story to a friend,
but i always suspected that i derived more
pleasure from keeping the secret than i would
from telling it. in 1929, a casual conversation
suddenly moved me to break the long silence.
josé olave, the re-tired chief of police, had been
telling me stories of the knife fighters that hung
out in the tough neighborhoods of retiro, down
near the docks—el bajo and that area. he said 
men such as that were capable of anything—
ambush, betrayal, trickery, the lowest and most
infamous kind of villainy— in order to get the
better of their opponents, and he remarked that
before the podestás and the gutierrezes,*
there'd been very little knife fighting, the handto-hand
sort of thing. i told him that i'd once
actually witnessed such a fight, and then i told
the story of that night so many years before.
he listened to me with professional
attention, and then he asked me a question:
"are you sure uriarte and the other man had
never used a knife in a fight before? that a
stretch in the country at one time or another
hadn't taught them something?"
"no," i replied. "everyone there that night
knew everyone else, and none of them could
believe their eyes."
olave went on unhurriedly, as though
thinking out loud.
"you say one of those daggers had a ushaped
cross guard-- there were two famous
daggers like that—the one that moreira used
and the one that belonged to juan almada, out 
around tapalquén."
something stirred in my memory.
"you also mentioned a wood-handled knife,"
olave went on, "with the mark of a little tree on
the blade.
there are thousands of knives like that; that
was the mark of the company that made them.
but there was one..."
he stopped a moment, then went on:
"there was an acevedo that had a country
place near pergamino. and there was another
brawler of some repute that made his
headquarters in that area at the turn of the
century—juan almanza. from the first man he
killed, at the age of fourteen, he always used
one of those short knives, because he said it
brought him luck. there was bad blood between
juan almanza and juan almada, because
people got them mixed up—their names, you
see... they kept their eyes open for each other a
long time, but somehow their paths never
crossed. juan almanza was killed by a stray
bullet in some election or other. the other one,
i think, finally died of old age in the hospital at 
las flores."
nothing more was said that afternoon; we
both sat thinking.
nine or ten men, all of them now dead, saw
what my eyes saw—the long thrust at the body
and the body sprawled beneath the sky—but
what they saw was the end of another, older
story. maneco uñarte did not kill duncan; it
was the weapons, not the men, that fought.
they had lain sleeping, side by side, in a
cabinet, until hands awoke them. perhaps they
stirred when they awoke; perhaps that was why
uriarte's hand shook, and duncan's as well. the
two knew how to fight—the knives, i mean, not
the men, who were merely their instruments—
and they fought well that night. they had
sought each other for a long time, down the
long roads of the province, and at last they had
found each other; by that time their gauchos
were dust. in the blades of those knives there
slept, and lurked, a human grudge.
things last longer than men. who can say
whether the story ends here; who can say that
they will never meet again. 
juan muraña
for years i said i was brought up in
palermo.* it was, i know now, mere literary
braggadocio, because the fact is, i grew up
within the precincts of a long fence made of
spear-tipped iron lances, in a house with a
garden and my father's and grandfather's
library. the palermo of knife fights and guitars
was to be found (i have been given to
understand) on the street corners and in the
bars and tenement houses.
in 1930, i devoted an essay to evaristo
carriego, our neighbor, a poet whose songs
glorified those neighborhoods on the outskirts
of the city. a short time after that, chance threw
emilio tràpani in my way.
i was taking the train to morón; tràpani,
who was sitting beside the window, spoke to me
by name. it took me a moment to recognize
him; so many years had gone by since we
shared a bench in that school on calle thames.
(roberto godei will recall that.) tràpani and i
had never particularly liked each other; time,
and reciprocal indifference, had put even
greater distance between us. it was he, i now
remember, who had taught me the rudiments of
lunfardo—the thieves jargon of the day. there
on the train we fell into one of those trivial
conversations that are bent upon dredging up
pointless in-formation and that sooner or later
yield the news of the death of a school-mate
who's nothing but a name to us anymore.
then suddenly tràpani changed the subject.
"somebody lent me your book on carriego,"
he said. "it's full of knife fighters and thugs and
underworld types. tell me, borges," he said,
looking at me as though stricken with holy
terror, "what can you know about knife fighters
and thugs and underworld types?"
"i've read up on the subject," i replied.
" 'read up on it' is right," he said, not letting
me go on. "but i don't need to 'read up'—i know
those people."
after a silence, he added, as though sharing a 
secret with me:
"i am a nephew of juan muraña."*
of all the knife fighters in palermo in the
nineties, muraña was the one that people talked
about most.
"florentina, my mother's sister," he went on,
"was muraña's wife. you might be interested in
the story."
certain rhetorical flourishes and one or
another overlong sentence in *trápani's
narration made me suspect that this was not the
first time he had told it.
it was always a source of chagrin to my
mother that her sister would marry juan
muraña, whom my mother considered a coldblooded
rogue, though
florentina saw him as a "man of action."
there were many versions of the fate that befell
my uncle. there were those who claimed that
one night when he'd been drinking he fell off
the seat of his wagon as he turned the corner of
coronel and cracked his skull on the
cobblestones. some said the law was after him 
and he ran off to uruguay. my mother, who
could never bear her brother-in-law, never
explained it to me. i was just a tyke, and i don't
really even remember him.
around the time of the centennial,* we were
living on russell alley. it was a long, narrow
house we lived in, so while the front door was
on russell, the back door, which was always
locked, was on san salvador. my aunt, who was
getting on in years and had become a little odd,
lived in a bedroom in the attic. a skinny, bony
woman she was, or so she seemed to me—tall,
and miserly with her words. she was afraid of
fresh air, never went outside, and she wouldn't
let us come in her room; more than once i
caught her stealing food and hiding it. around
the neighborhood, people would some-times
say that muraña's death, or disappearance, had
driven her insane. i always picture her dressed
in black. she'd taken to talking to herself. the
owner of our house was a man named luchessi*
who had a barbershop in barracas.*my mother,
who worked at home as a seamstress, was
having a hard time making ends meet. though i 
didn't really understand it all, i would overhear
certain whispered words: justice of the peace,
dispossession, eviction for nonpayment. my
mother suffered terribly; my aunt would
stubbornly say that juan would never let that
wop* throw us out. she would recall the case—
which she'd told us about dozens of times—of a
scurrilous thug from the southside who'd had
the audacity to cast aspersions on her husband's
courage. when juan muraña found out, he'd
gone all the way to the other side of the city,
found the man, settled the dispute with one
thrust of his knife, and thrown the body in the
riachuelo. i can't say whether the story was
true; the important thing at the time was that it
had been told and believed.
i pictured myself sleeping in the archways on
calle serrano, or begging, or standing on a
corner with a basket of peaches. i half liked the
idea of selling peaches—it would get me out of
going to school.
i'm not certain how long all the worrying and
anguish lasted. your father, rest his soul, told us
once that time can't be measured in days the
way money is measured in pesos and centavos,
because all pesos are equal, while every day,
perhaps every hour, is different. i didn't fully
understand what he meant then, but the phrase
stayed in my mind.
one night during this time, i had a dream
that turned into a nightmare. it was a dream
about my uncle juan. i'd never known him, but
in my dream he was a strong, muscular man
with indian features and a sparse mustache and
long flowing hair. we were riding toward the
south, through big quarries and stands of
underbrush, but those quarries and stands of
underbrush were also calle thames.* in my
dream, the sun was high in the sky. uncle juan
was dressed all in black. he stopped in a narrow
pass, near some sort of scaffolding. he had his
hand under his coat, over his heart—not like a
man who's about to draw his weapon, but like
one who's trying to hide it. he said to me, in a
voice filled with sadness, "i've changed a great
deal." then he slowly pulled out his hand, and
what i saw was a vulture's claw. i woke up
screaming in the dark. 
the next day my mother told me she was
taking me with her to see luchessi. i knew she
was going to ask for more time; she was taking
me along, i'm sure, so the landlord could see
how pathetic she was.
she didn't say a word to her sister, who
would never have allowed her to lower herself
that way. i'd never been in barracas; to my eyes
there were more people, more traffic, and fewer
vacant lots than where we lived. when we came
to a certain corner, we saw policemen and a
crowd in front of the number we were looking
for. one man who lived there on the street was
going from group to group, telling the story of
how he'd been awakened at three in the
morning by banging noises; he'd heard the door
open and somebody step inside. nobody had
ever closed the door—at dawn luchessi was
found lying in the entryway, half dressed. he'd
been stabbed repeatedly. he had lived alone;
the police never found the culprit. nothing had
been stolen. someone recalled that recently the
deceased man had been losing his eyesight.
"his time had come," another person said in a 
voice of authority. that verdict, and the tone
with which it was delivered, impressed me; as
the years have gone by i've noticed that
whenever someone dies, there's always some
sententious soul who has the same revelation.
at the wake, somebody brought around
coffee and i drank a cup. there was a wax
dummy in the coffin instead of the dead man. i
mentioned this fact to my mother; one of the
mourners laughed and assured me that the
figure dressed in black was indeed sr. luchessi.
i stood there fascinated, staring at him. my
mother had to take me by the arm and pull me
away.
for months people talked about nothing else.
crimes were rare then; think of how much talk
there was about the longhair and squealer and
chairmaker affair. the only person in buenos
aires utterly unconcerned by the scandal was
my aunt florentina. with the insistence of old
age, all she would say when the subject was
brought up was, "i told you people that juan
would never stand for that wop putting us out
in the street." 
one day there was a terrible storm; it seemed
as though the sky had opened and the clouds
had burst.
since i couldn't go to school, i started
opening doors and drawers and cabinets,
rummaging inside the way boys do, to see what
secret treasures the house might hide. after a
while i went up into the attic.
there was my aunt, sitting with her hands
folded in her lap; i sensed that she wasn't even
thinking. her room smelled musty. in one
corner stood the iron bed, with a rosary hanging
on one of the bedposts; in another, the wooden
wardrobe for her clothes. on one of the
whitewashed walls there was a lithograph of the
virgen del carmen. a candlestick sat on the
nightstand.
"i know what brings you up here," my aunt
said, without raising her eyes. "your mother
sent you. she can't get it through her head that
it was juan that saved us."
"juan?" i managed to say. "juan died over
ten years ago."
"juan is here," she said. "you want to see
him?"
she opened the drawer of the nightstand and
took out a dagger.
"here he is," she said softly. "i knew he'd
never leave me. there's never been a man like
him on earth. the wop never had a chance."
it was only then that i understood. that poor
foolish, misdirected woman had murdered
luchessi.
driven by hatred, madness—perhaps, who
knows, even love—she had slipped out the back
door, made her way through one street after
another in the night, and come at last to the
house. then, with those big bony hands, she
had plunged the dagger into his chest. the
dagger was muraña, it was the dead man that
she went on loving.
i'll never know whether she told my mother.
she died a short time before we were evicted.
that was the end of the story that tràpani
told me. i've never seen him again since. in the
tale of that woman left all alone in the world,
the woman who confuses her man, her tiger,
with that cruel object he has bequeathed to her, 
the weapon of his bloody deeds, i believe one
can make out a symbol, or many symbols. juan
muraña was a man who walked my own
familiar streets, who knew and did the things
that men know and do, who one day tasted
death, and who then became a knife. now he is
the memory of a knife. tomorrow—oblivion, the
common oblivion, forgotten.
the elderly lady
on january 14, 1941, maría justina rubio de
jáuregui would celebrate her hundredth
birthday. she was the only living child of the
soldiers who had fought the wars of
independence.*
colonel mariano rubio, her father, was what
might without irony or disrespect be called a
minor national hero. born the son of provincial
landowners in the parish of la merced, rubio
was promoted to second lieutenant in the army
of the andes and served at chacabuco, at the
defeat at cancha rayada, at maipú, and, two
years later, at arequipa.*the story is told that
on the eve of that action, he and josé de
olavarría exchanged swords.* in early april of
'23 there took place the famous battle of cerro
alto, which, since it was fought in the valley, is
also called the battle of cerro bermejo.*always
envious of our argentine glories, the
venezuelans have attributed that victory to
general simón bolívar, but the impartial
observer, the argentine historian, is not so
easily taken in; he knows very well that the
laurels won there belong to colonel mariano
rubio. it was rubio, at the head of a regiment
of colombian hussars, who turned the tide of
the uncertain battle waged with saber and
lance, the battle that in turn prepared the way
for the no less famous action at ayacucho,* in
which rubio also fought, and indeed was
wounded. in '27 he acquitted himself with
courage at ituzaingó,* where he served under
the immediate command of carlos maria
alvear.*in spite of his kinship with rosas,*
rubio was a lavalleman,* a supporter of the
unitarian party, and he dispersed the
montonero insurgents* in an action that he
always characterized as "taking a swipe at them
with our sabers."
when the unitarians were defeated, rubio
left argentina for uruguay. there, he married.
during the course of the great war he died in
montevideo, which was under siege by oribe's
white* army. he was just short of his fortyfourth
birthday, which at that time was virtually
old age. he was a friend of florencio varela's. it
is entirely likely that he would never have got
past the professors at the military college, for
he had been in battles but never taken a single
course in warfare. he left two daughters; only
maría justina, the younger, concerns us here.
in late '53 the colonel's widow and her
daughters took up residence in buenos aires.
they did not recover the place in the country
that the tyrant* had confiscated from them, but
the memory of those lost leagues of land, which
they had never seen, survived in the family for
many years. at the age of seventeen maría
justina married dr. bernardo jáuregui, who, 
though a civilian, fought at pavón and at
cepeda*and died in the exercise of his
profession during the yellow fever epidemic.*
he left one son and two daughters: mariano,
the firstborn, was a tax inspector whose desire
to write the complete biography of the hero (a
book he never completed, and perhaps never
began to write) led him to frequent the national
library and the archives. the elder daughter,
maria elvira, married her cousin, one saavedra,
who was a clerk in the ministry of finance*; the
second daughter, julia, married a sr. molinari,
who though having an italian surname was a
professor of latin and a very well-educated
man.
i pass over grandchildren and greatgrandchildren;
let it suffice that the reader
picture an honest and honorable family of
somewhat fallen fortune, over which there
presides an epic shade and the daughter who
was born in exile.
they lived modestly in palermo, not far from
the guadalupe church; there, mariano still
recalls having seen, from a trolley car, a lake
that was bordered by laborers' and farmers'
houses built of unplastered brick rather than
sheets of zinc; the poverty of yesterday was less
squalid than the poverty we purchase with our
industry today. fortunes were smaller then, as
well.
the rubios' residence was above the
neighborhood dry goods store. the stairway at
the side of the building was narrow; the railing
on the right-hand side continued on to become
one side of the dark vestibule, where there were
a hall tree and a few chairs. the vestibule
opened into the little parlor with its upholstered
furnishings, the parlor into the dining room
with its mahogany table and chairs and its
china cabinet. the iron shutters (never opened,
for fear of the glare of the sun) admitted a wan
half-light. i recall the odor of things locked
away. at the rear lay the bedrooms, the bath, a
small patio with a washtub, and the maid's
room. in the entire house the only books were a
volume of andrade, a monograph by the hero
(with handwritten additions), and montanery
simon's hispano-american dictionary,
purchased because it could be paid for in
installments and because of the little dictionary
stand that came with it. the family lived on a
small pension, which always arrived late, and
also received rent from a piece of land (the sole
remnant of the once-vast cattle ranch) in lomas
de zamora. at the date of my story the elderly
lady was living with julia, who had been
widowed, and one of julia's sons. she still
abominated artigas, rosas, and urquiza.*
world war i, which made her detest germans
(about whom she knew very little), was less real
to her than the 1890 revolution and the charge
on cerro alto. since 1932 her mind had been
gradually growing dimmer; the best metaphors
are the common ones, for they are the only true
ones. she was, of course, a catholic, which did
not mean that she believed in a god who is
three yet one, or even in the immortality of the
soul. she murmured prayers she did not
understand and her fingers told her beads.
instead of the paschal and three kings' day
celebrations that were the custom in argentina,
she had come to adopt christmas, and to drink 
tea rather than mate. the words protestant,
jew, mason, heretic, and atheist were all
synonymous to her, and all meaningless.
so long as she was able, she spoke not of
spaniards but of goths, as her parents had. in
1910 she refused to believe that the infanta,
who after all was a princess, spoke, against all
one's expectations, like a common galician and
not like an argentine lady. it was at her son-inlaw's
wake that she was told this startling news
by a rich relative (who had never set foot in the
house though the family eagerly looked for
mention of her in the social columns of the
newspaper). the names the elderly lady called
things by were always out of date: she spoke of
the calle de las artes, the calle del temple, the
calle buen orden, the calle de la piedad, the
dos calles largas, the plaza del parque, and the
plaza de los portones. what were affectations in
other members of the family (who would say
easterners instead of uruguayans* for
instance) came naturally to the widow jáuregui.
she never left her house; she may never have
suspected that with the years buenos aires had 
grown and changed. one's first memories are
the most vivid ones; the city that the elderly
lady saw in her mind's eye on the other side of
the front door was no doubt a much earlier one
than the city that existed at the time they'd had
to move toward the outskirts; the oxen of the
oxcarts must still have stood at rest in plaza del
once,* and dead violets still have perfumed the
country houses of barracas.* all i dream about
now is dead men was one of the last things she
was heard to say. she was never stupid, but she
had never, so far as i know, enjoyed the
pleasures of the intellect; there remained to her
the pleasures of memory, and then,
forgetfulness. she was always generous. i recall
her tranquil blue eyes and her smile. who can
say what tumult of passions (now lost but
erstwhile burning brightly) there had been in
that old woman who had once been so
charming and well favored. sensitive to plants,
whose modest, silent life was so much like her
own, she raised begonias in her room and
touched the leaves she could not see. until
1929, when she fell into her reverie, she would 
tell stories of historical events, but always with
the same words and in the same order, as
though they were the paternoster, and i suspect
that after a while they no longer corresponded
to images in her mind. she had no marked
preferences in food. she was, in a word, happy.
sleeping, as we all know, is the most secret
thing we do. we devote one third of our lives to
sleep, yet we do not understand it. some believe
it is only an eclipse of wakefulness; others, a
more complex state which embraces at once
yesterday, the present, and tomorrow; still
others see it as an uninterrupted series of
dreams. to say that the elderly lady of my story
spent ten years in a state of serene chaos is
perhaps an error; every moment of those ten
years may have been pure present, without past
or future.
if so, we should not marvel overmuch at that
present (which in our own case we count in
days and nights and hundreds of pages torn
from many calendars, and in anxieties and
events)—we voyage through it every morning
before we are fully awake and every night
before we fall asleep. twice every day we are
that elderly lady.
the jáureguis lived, as we have seen, in a
somewhat equivocal position. they saw
themselves as members of the aristocracy, but
those who made up that class knew nothing of
them; they were the descendants of a national
hero, but most textbooks omitted his name. it
was true that a street commemorated colonel
mariano rubio, but that street, which very few
people were familiar with, was lost behind the
cemetery on the west side of the city.
the day of her centennial was drawing near.
on the tenth, a uniformed soldier appeared
with a letter signed by the minister himself,
announcing his visit on the fourteenth. the
jáureguis showed the letter to the entire
neighborhood, pointing out the engraved
letterhead and the minister's personal
signature. the journalists who would be writing
the newspaper reports then began dropping by.
they were given all the facts; it was obvious
they'd never in their lives heard of colonel
rubio. virtual strangers called on the
telephone, hoping the family would invite them
to the celebration.
the household labored diligently in
preparation for the great day. they waxed the
floors, washed the windows, removed the
muslin covers from the chandeliers, shined the
mahogany, polished the silver in the china
cabinet, rearranged the furniture, and opened
the piano in the parlor in order to show off the
velvet keyboard cover. there was much
scurrying about. the only person not involved
in the bustle of activity was the elderly lady
herself, who appeared not to understand what
was going on. she would smile; julia, with the
help of the maid, dressed her smartly and
arranged her hair, as though she were already
dead. the first thing visitors would see when
they came in the door was the oil portrait of the
hero, and then, a little lower and to the right,
the sword of his many battles. even in the most
penurious times, the family had refused to sell
it; they planned to donate it to the museum of
history. a neighbor very thoughtfully lent them
a pot of geraniums for the occasion. 
the party was to begin at seven. the
invitations gave the hour as six-thirty because
the family knew everyone would come a little
late, so as not to be the first to arrive. at seventen
not a soul had come; somewhat
acrimoniously, the family discussed the
advantages and disadvantages of tardiness:
elvira, who prided herself on her punctuality,
declared it was an unforgivable discourtesy to
leave people waiting; julia, repeating the words
of her late husband, replied that visitors who
arrived late showed their consideration, since if
everyone arrives a little late it's more
comfortable all around, and no one has to feel
rushed. by seven-fifteen not another soul could
squeeze into the house. the entire
neighborhood could see and envy sra.
figueroa's car and driver* (or chauffeur, as she
was heard to call him); she almost never invited
the sisters to her house, but they greeted her
effusively, so nobody would suspect that they
saw each other only once in a blue moon. the
president sent his aide-de-camp, a very
charming gentleman who said it was an honor 
to shake the hand of the daughter of the hero of
cerro alto. the minister, who had to leave
early, read a most high-sounding speech filled
with excellent epigrams, in which, however, he
spoke more of san martin than of colonel
rubio. the elderly lady sat in her chair amid the
cushions, and at times her head would nod or
she would drop her fan. a group of
distinguished females, the ladies of the nation,
sang the national anthem to her, though she
seemed not to hear. photographers arranged
the guests into artistic groupings, and their
flashbulbs dazzled the celebrants' eyes. there
were not enough little glasses of port and sherry
to go around. several bottles of champagne
were uncorked. the elderly lady spoke not a
single word; she may not have known who she
was. from that night onward she was
bedridden.
when the strangers had left, the family
improvised a little cold supper. the smell of
tobacco and coffee had already dissipated the
light odor of benzoin.*
the morning and evening newspapers told
loyal untruths; they ex-claimed upon the almost
miraculous memory of the hero's daughter, who
was "an eloquent archive of one hundred years
of argentine history." julia tried to show her
those reports. in the dim light, the elderly lady
lay unmoving, her eyes closed. she did not have
a fever; the doctor examined her and said
everything was all right. in a few days she died.
the storming of her house by the mob, the
unwonted stir, the flashbulbs, the speech, the
uniforms, the repeated handshakes, and the
popping of the champagne corks had hastened
her end.
perhaps she thought it was one of rosas'
posses* that had come.
i think about the men killed at cerro alto, i
think about the forgotten men of our continent
and spain who perished under the horses'
hooves, and it occurs to me that the last victim
of that chaos of lances in peru was to be, more
than a hundred years afterward, an elderly lady
in buenos aires. 
the duel
for juan osvaldo viviano
it is the sort of story that henry james
(whose writings were first revealed to me by
clara glencairn de figueroa,* one of the two
protagonists of my story) might not have
scorned to use. he would have consecrated
more than a hundred tender and ironic pages to
it, and would have embellished them with
complex and scrupulously ambiguous dialogue;
he might well have added a touch of
melodrama. the essence of the story would not
have been altered by its new setting in london
or boston. but the events in fact took place in
buenos aires, and there i shall leave them. i
shall give just a summary of the case, since the
slowness of its pace and the worldliness of the
circles in which it occurred are foreign to my
own literary habits. dictating this story is for
me a modest, sideline sort of adventure. i
should warn the reader that the episodes of the
tale are less important than the situation that
led to them, and less important, too, than the
characters that figure in them.
clara glencairn was tall and proud and had
fiery red hair. less intellectual than
understanding, she was not clever yet she was
able to appreciate the cleverness of others—
even of other women. in her soul, there was
room for hospitality. she was delighted by
differences; perhaps that is why she traveled so
much. she knew that the locale in which chance
set her was a sometimes arbitrary conjunction
of rites and ceremonies, yet she found those
rituals amusing, and she carried them out with
grace and dignity.
her parents, the glencairns, married her off
when she was still quite young to a dr. isidro
figueroa—at that time the argentine
ambassador to canada, though he eventually
resigned his post, declaring that in an age of
telegrams and telephones, embassies were an
anachronism and an unnecessary expense to
the nation. that decision earned him the
resentment of all his colleagues; though clara
herself liked ottawa's climate (she was, after all, 
of scottish decent) and did not find the duties
of an ambassador's wife distasteful, she never
dreamed of protesting. dr. figueroa died a
short time later; clara, after a few years of
indecision and quiet casting about, decided to
become a painter. she was inspired to this,
perhaps, by her friend marta pizarra.
it is typical of marta pizarro that whenever
she was mentioned, she was defined as the
sister of the brilliant (married and separated)
nélida sara.
before taking up her brushes, marta had
considered the alternative of literature. she
could be witty in french, the language her
readings generally were drawn from; spanish
for her was no more than a household utensil,
much like guaraní for the ladies of corrientes
province. newspapers had put the pages of
argentina's own lugones and the spaniard
ortegay gassetinto her hands; the style of those
masters confirmed her suspicions that the
language to which she had been fated was
suited less to the expression of thought (or
passion) than to prattling vanity. of music she 
knew only what any person might know who
dutifully attended concerts. she was from the
province of san luis; she began her career with
meticulous portraits of juan crisòstomo
lafinur* and colonel pascual pringles,*and
these were predictably acquired by the
provincial museum. from the portraiture of
local worthies she progressed to that of the old
houses of buenos aires, whose modest patios
she limned with modest colors rather than the
stagy garishness that others gave them.
someone (most certainly not clara figueroa)
remarked that marta pizarro's oeuvre took for
its models the solid works of certain
nineteenth-century genoese bricklayers.*
between clara glencairn and nélida sara (who
was said to have fancied dr. figueroa at one
point) there was always a certain rivalry;
perhaps the duel was between those two
women, and marta but an instrument.
everything, as we all know, happens first in
other countries and then after a time in
argentina. the sect of painters, today so
unfairly forgotten, that was called "concrete" or 
"abstract" (as though to indicate its contempt
for logic and for language) is one of many
examples of this phenomenon. the movement
argued, i believe, that just as music is allowed
to create a world made entirely of sound, so
painting, music's sister art, might essay colors
and forms that do not reproduce the forms and
colors of the objects our eyes see. lee kaplan
wrote that his canvases, which outraged the
bourgeoisie, obeyed the biblical stricture,
shared with islam, against human hands'
creating images (gr. eidolon) of living
creatures. the iconoclasts, then, he argued, as
breakers of the idols, were returning to the true
tradition of pictorial art, a tradition which had
been perverted by such heretics as dürer and
rembrandt; kaplan's detractors accused him of
invoking a tradition exemplified by rugs,
kaleidoscopes, and neckties. aesthetic
revolutions hold out the temptation of the
irresponsible and the easy; clara glencairn
decided to become an abstract artist. she had
always worshiped turner; she set out to enrich
abstract art with her own vague splendors. she 
labored without haste. she reworked or
destroyed several compositions, and in the
winter of 1954 she exhibited a series of
temperas in a gallery on calle suipacha — a
gallery whose speciality was art that might be
called, as the military metaphor then in fashion
had it, "avant-garde." the result was
paradoxical: general opinion was kind, but the
sect's official organ took a dim view of the
paintings' anomalous forms—forms which,
while not precisely figurative, nonetheless
seemed not content to be austere lines and
curves, but instead suggested the tumult of a
sunset, a jungle, or the sea. the first to smile,
perhaps, was clara glencairn. she had set out
to be modern, and the moderns rejected her.
but painting itself—the act of painting—was
much more important to her than any success
that might come of it, and so she continued to
paint. far removed from this episode, painting
followed its own course.
the secret duel had now begun. marta
pizarra was not simply an artist; she was
passionately interested in what might not
unfairly be called the administrative aspect of
art, and she was undersecretary of a group
called the giotto circle. in mid-1955 she
managed things so that clara, already admitted
as a member, was elected to the group's new
board of directors. this apparently trivial fact
deserves some comment. marta had supported
her friend, yet the unquestionable if mysterious
truth is that the person who be-stows a favor is
somehow superior to the person who receives it.
then, in 1960 or thereabout, two "worldrenowned
artists" (if we may be pardoned the
cliché) were competing for a single first prize.
one of the candidates, the older of the two, had
filled solemn canvases with portraits of blood
curdling gauchos as tall as norsemen; his rival,
the merest youngster, had earned applause and
scandal through studied and unwavering
incoherence. the jurors, all past the half
century mark, feared being thought to be oldfashioned,
and so they were inclined to vote for
the younger man, whose work, in their heart of
hearts, they disliked. after stubborn debate
(carried on at first out of courtesy and toward 
the end out of tedium), they could not come to
an agreement. in the course of the third
discussion, someone ventured the following:
"i do not think bis a good painter; i honestly
don't think he's as good as mrs. figueroa."*
"would you vote for her?" another asked,
with a touch of sarcasm.
"i would," replied the first, now irritated.
that same afternoon, the jury voted
unanimously to give the prize to clara
glencairn de figueroa. she was distinguished,
lovable, of impeccable morality, and she tended
to give parties, photographed by the most costly
magazines, at her country house in pilar. the
celebratory dinner was given (and its costs
assumed) by marta. clara thanked her with a
few well-chosen words; she observed that there
was no conflict between the traditional and the
new, between order and adventure. tradition,
she said, is itself a centuries-long chain of
adventures. the show was attended by
numerous luminaries of society, almost all the
members of the jury, and one or two painters.
we all think that fate has dealt us a wretched 
sort of lot in life, and that others must be better.
the cult of gauchos and the beatus ilk... are
urban nostalgias; clara glencairn and marta
pizarra, weary of the routines of idleness,
yearned for the world of artists—men and
women who devoted their lives to the creation
of beautiful things. i presume that in the heaven
of the blessed there are those who believe that
the advantages of that locale are much
exaggerated by theologists, who have never
been there themselves.
and perhaps in hell the damned are not
always happy.
two or three years later the first
international congress of latin american art
took place in the city of cartagena. each latin
american republic sent one representative. the
theme of the congress was (if we may be
pardoned the cliché) of burning interest: can
the artist put aside, ignore, fail to include the
autochthonous elements of culture—can the
artist leave out the fauna and flora, be
insensitive to social issues, not join his or her
voice to those who are struggling against u.s.
and british imperialism, etcetera, etcetera?
before being ambassador to canada, dr.
figueroa had held a diplomatic post in
cartagena; clara, made more than a little vain
by the award that had been granted her, would
have liked to return to that city, now as a
recognized artist in her own right. but that hope
was dashed—the government appointed marta
pizarra to be the country's representative. her
performance, according to the impartial
testimony of the buenos aires correspondents,
was often brilliant, though not always
persuasive.
life must have its consuming passion. the
two women found that passion in painting—or
rather, in the relationship that painting forced
them into. clara glencairn painted against, and
in some sense for, marta pizarro; each was her
rival's judge and solitary audience. in their
canvases, which no one any longer looked at, i
believe i see (as there inevitably had to be) a
reciprocal influence. and we must not forget
that the two women loved each other, that in
the course of that private duel they acted with 
perfect loyalty to one another.
it was around this same time that marta,
now no longer so young as be-fore, rejected an
offer of marriage; only her battle interested her.
on february 2, 1964, clara figueroa suffered
a stroke and died. the newspapers printed long
obituaries of the sort that are still de rigueur in
argentina, wherein the woman is a
representative of the species, not an individual.
with the exception of an occasional brief
mention of her enthusiasm for art and her
refined taste, it was her faith, her goodness, her
constant and virtually anonymous
philanthropy, her patrician lineage (her father,
general glencairn, had fought in the brazil
campaign), and her distinguished place in the
highest social circles that were praised. marta
realized that her own life now had no meaning.
she had never felt so useless. she recalled the
first tentative paintings she had done, now so
long ago, and she exhibited in the national
gallery a somber portrait of clara in the style of
the english masters they had both so much
admired. someone said it was her best work.
she never painted again.
in that delicate duel (perceived only by those
few of us who were intimate friends) there were
no defeats or victories, nor even so much as an
open clash—no visible circumstances at all, save
those i have attempted to record with my
respectful pen. only god (whose œsthetic
preferences are unknown to us) can bestow the
final palm. the story that moved in darkness
ends in darkness.
the other duel
one summer evening in adrogué* many
years ago, this story was told to me by carlos
reyles, the son of the uruguayan novelist. in
my memory this chronicle of a long-held hatred
and its tragic end still calls up the medicinal
fragrance of the eucalyptus trees and the
singing of the birds.
we were talking, as we always did, about the
interwoven history of our two countries. at one 
point he said i'd surely heard of juan patricio
nolan, who had earned a reputation as a brave
man, a teller of tall tales, and a practical joker.
lying myself, i said i had. nolan had died in '90
or thereabout, but people still thought of him as
a friend. he had his detractors, too, of course,
as we all do. carlos told me one of the many
little pranks that nolan was said to have played.
the incident had taken place a short while
before the battle of manantiales*; its
protagonists were manuel cardoso and carmen
silveira, two gauchos from cerro largo.*
how and why had the hatred between those
two men begun? how, a century or more later,
can we recover the shadowy story of those two
men whose only fame was earned in their final
duel? there was a man named laderecha—an
overseer at reyles' father's ranch, "with a
mustache like a tiger's"—who had gleaned from
"oral tradition" certain details that i shall
recount; i set them down here for what they are
worth and with no further assurances as to their
veracity, since both forgetfulness and
recollection are creative. 
manuel cardoso's and carmen silveira's
small ranches bordered one another. as with
the origins of other passions, the origins of a
hatred are al-ways obscure, but there was talk
of a dispute over some unmarked animals, or,
alternately, of a bareback horse race during
which silveira, who was the stronger, had
bumped cardoso's horse off the track. months
later, in the town's general store, there had been
a long game of two-handed truco; silveira
congratulated his opponent on his play to
virtually every trick, but he left him at the end
without a penny. as he was raking the money
into his purse, he thanked cardoso for the
lesson he had given him. it was then, i think,
that they almost came to blows. the game had
been hard fought; the onlookers (there had
been many) had to separate them. on that
frontier and at that time, man stood up to man
and blade to blade; an unusual feature of this
story is, as we will see, that manuel cardoso
and carmen silveira crossed paths up in the
mountains twice a day, morning and evening,
though they never actually fought until the end. 
perhaps their only possession in their coarse
primitive lives was their hatred, and therefore
they saved it and stored it up. without
suspecting, each of the two became the other's
slave.
i have no way of knowing whether the events
i am about to narrate are effects or causes.
cardoso, less out of love than for something
to do, took a fancy to a girl who lived nearby, a
girl everyone called la serviliana, and he began
to court her; no sooner had silveira discovered
this than he began to court the girl in his own
way, and carried her off to his ranch. after a few
months he threw her out; she got on his nerves.
indignant, the woman sought refuge at
cardoso's place; cardoso spent one night with
her and sent her off at noon. he didn't want the
other man's leftovers.
it was at about the same time — a little
before or after la serviliana — that the incident
with the sheepdog took place. silveira was very
fond of the dog, and had named it thirtythree.*
it was found dead in a ditch; silveira
always thought he knew who'd poisoned the
dog.
in the winter of '70, aparicio's revolution*
caught cardoso and silveira drinking in that
same general-store-and-bar where they'd
played their game of truco. a brazilian soldier
with mulatto features, heading up a small band
of montoneros* came through the door. he
gave the men gathered there a rousing speech;
their country needed them, he said — the
government's oppression was intolerable. he
passed out white badges* to pin on, and at the
end of that exordium which they had not
understood, he and his platoon impressed them
into service — they were not even allowed to say
good-bye to their families. manuel cardoso and
carmen silveira accepted their fate; a soldier's
life was no harder than a gaucho's. they were
used to sleeping in the open with a horse
blanket as a mattress and a saddle as a pillow,
and for the hand accustomed to killing animals,
killing a man was not a great deal different.
their lack of imagination freed them from fear
and pity alike, though fear did touch them
sometimes, just as the cavalry charged them. 
(the rattle of stirrups and weapons is one of
the things you can always hear when the cavalry
rides into the action.) but if a man isn't
wounded right away, he thinks himself
invulnerable. they did not miss the places
they'd been born and raised in. the concept of
patriotism was foreign to them; in spite of the
insignia worn on the hats, one side was much
the same as the other to them. they learned
what can be done with the lance. in the course
of advances and retreats, they at last came to
feel that being comrades al-lowed them to go on
being rivals. they fought shoulder to shoulder
yet they never, so far as is known, exchanged a
single word.
in the fall of '71, which was a hard time, the
end came to the two men.
the engagement, which lasted less than an
hour, occurred at a place whose name they
never learned—historians assign the names
later. on the eve of the battle, cardoso crawled
into the captain's tent and asked him, in a
whisper, to save one of the reds for him if they
won the next day—he had never cut anybody's 
throat,* he said, and he wanted to know what it
was like. the captain promised that if he
conducted himself like a man, he'd grant him
that favor.
the whites outnumbered the reds, but the
reds had better weaponry. from the top of a
hill they commanded, they rained devastation
on the whites. after two charges that failed to
reach the peak, the white captain, gravely
wounded, surrendered. there on the field, at
his request, his men ended his life.
then they laid down their arms. captain
juan patricio nolan, commander of the reds,
gave a long-winded and flowery order that all
the captives' throats be cut. but he was from
cerro largo, and not unfamiliar with silveira
and cardoso's long-standing grudge, so he had
them brought to him.
"i know you two can't bear the sight of each
other," he said, "and that you've been waiting a
long time for the chance to settle scores. so i've
got good news for you. before the sun goes
down, you're going to get the chance to show
which one of you is the toughest. i'm going to 
have your throats cut, and then you're going to
run a race. like they say—may the best man
win."
the soldier who had brought them took them
away.
the news spread quickly through the camp.
nolan had wanted the race to crown that
evening's performance, but the prisoners sent a
committee to ask him if they couldn't watch it,
too, and make bets on the winner. nolan, a
reasonable man, let himself be convinced. the
men bet money, riding gear, knives, and horses;
their winnings would be turned over to their
widows and next of kin when the time came.
the day was hot; so everyone could have a
siesta, the event was put off till four. (they had
a hard time waking silveira up.) nolan,
typically, kept them all waiting for an hour. he
had no doubt been reliving the victory with the
other officers; the orderly made the rounds with
the mate.
on each side of the dusty road, against the
tents, the ranks of prisoners sat on the ground
and waited, hands tied behind their backs so
they'd give nobody any trouble. one would
occasionally unburden himself with an oath,
another murmur the beginning of the lord's
prayer; almost all were in a state verging on
stupefaction. naturally, they couldn't smoke.
they no longer cared about the race, but they
all watched.
"when they slit my throat, they're going to
grab me by the hair and pull my head back,
too," said one man, as though to ally himself
with the centers of attention.
"yeah, but you'll be along with the herd,"
replied another.
"along with you," the first man spit.
a sergeant drew the line across the road with
a saber. silveira's and cardoso's hands had
been untied so they wouldn't have to run offbalance.
they stood more than five yards apart.
they put their toes against the line; some of the
officers called out for them not to let them
down—they were counting on them. a great
deal of money was riding on each man.
silveira drew nigger nolan, whose
grandparents had doubtlessly been slaves of the 
captain's family, and so bore his name; cardoso
drew the regular executioner, an older man
from corrientes who always patted the
condemned man on the back and told him:
"buck up, friend; women suffer more than this
when they have a baby."
their torsos straining forward, the two
anxious men did not look at each other.
nolan gave the signal.
the part nigger nolan had been given to play
went to his head, and he overacted—he slashed
silveira's throat from ear to ear. the man from
corrientes made do with a neat slice. the blood
gushed, though, from both men's throats; they
stumbled a few steps and then fell headlong. as
he fell, cardoso stretched out his arms. he had
won, but he likely never knew that.
guayaquil*
now i shall never see the peak of higuereta
mirrored in the waters of the golfo plácido,
never make my journey to the western state,
never visit that library (which i, here in buenos
aires, picture in so many different ways, though
it must have its own precise existence, contain
its own lengthening shadows) where i was to
unriddle the handwriting of bolivar.
as i reread the foregoing paragraph in order
to compose the next one, i am surprised by its
tone at once melancholy and pompous. it may
be that one cannot speak about that caribbean
republic without echoing, however remotely,
the monumental style of its most famous
historiographer, capt. józef korzeniowski; but
in my case there is another reason—that first
paragraph was dictated by the intention, deep
within me, to imbue a mildly painful and
altogether trivial incident with a tone of pathos.
but i will relate what happened with absolute
honesty; that, perhaps, will help me understand
it.
after all, when one confesses to an act, one
ceases to be an actor in it and becomes its
witness, becomes a man that observes and
narrates it and no longer the man that
performed it.
the incident happened to me last friday in
this same room i am writing in now, at this
same hour of the afternoon (though today is
somewhat cooler). i know that we tend to forget
unpleasant things; i want to record my
conversation with dr. eduardo zimmermann
(of our sister university to the south) before it is
blurred by forgetfulness. my memory of it now
is still quite vivid.
the story can be better understood, perhaps,
with a brief recounting of the curious drama
surrounding certain letters written by simón
bolívar, "the liberator of the americas." these
letters were recently exhumed from the files of
the distinguished historian don josé avellanos,
whose historia de cincuenta años de
desgobierno ["a history of fifty years of
misrule"] was itself initially believed lost (under
circumstances which no one can fail to be
familiar with), then discovered and published in
1939 by his grandson, dr. ricardo avellanos. to
judge by references i have gathered from
various publications, most of these letters are of 
no great interest, but there is one, dated from
cartagena on august 13, 1822, in which bolivar
is said to give the details of his famous meeting
in guayaquil with gen. josé de san
martín.*one cannot overstress the value of a
document in which bolivar reveals, even if only
partially, what took place at that encounter.
ricardo avellanos, a staunch opponent of his
country's current government, refused to
surrender the correspondence to the academy
of history; he offered it, instead, to several
latin american republics. thanks to the
admirable zeal of our ambassador, dr. melaza,
the government of the argentine was the first to
accept avellanos' disinterested offer. it was
decided that a delegate would be sent to sulaco,
the capital of our neighbor country, to make
copies of the letters and publish them here. the
chancellor of our university, where i am
professor of latin american history, was so
kind as to recommend my name to the minister
of education as the person to carry out that
mission; i also obtained the more or less
unanimous support of the national academy of 
history, of which i am a member. just as the
date was set for my inter-view with the
minister, we learned that the university of the
south (which i prefer to think was unaware of
these decisions) had proposed the name of dr.
zimmermann.
dr. eduardo zimmermann, as the reader
perhaps may know, is a foreign-born historian
driven from his homeland by the third reich
and now an argentine citizen. of his
professional work (doubtlessly estimable), i
know at first hand only an article in vindication
of the semitic republic of carthage (which
posterity has judged through the writings of
roman historians, its enemies) and an essay of
sorts which contends that government should
function neither visibly nor by appeal to
emotion. this hypothesis was thought worthy of
refutation by martin heidegger, who proved
decisively (using photocopies of newspaper
headlines) that the modern head of state, far
from being anonymous, is in fact the
protagonistes, the khoragos, the david whose
dancing (assisted by the pageantry of the stage, 
and with un-apologetic recourse to the
hyperboles of the art of rhetoric) enacts the
drama of his people.
heidegger likewise proved that
zimmermann was of hebrew, not to say jewish,
descent. that article by the venerable
existentialist was the immediate cause of our
guest's exodus and subsequent nomadism.
zimmermann had no doubt come to buenos
aires in order to meet the minister; the
minister's personal suggestion, made to me
through the intermediary of a secretary, was
that, in order to forestall the unpleasant
spectacle of our country's two universities
disputing for the one prize, it be myself who
spoke to zimmermann, to apprise him of where
the matter stood. naturally, i agreed. when i
returned home, i was informed that dr.
zimmermann had phoned to tell me he was
coming that evening at six. i live, as most
people know, on calle chile.* it was exactly six
o'clock when the doorbell rang.
with republican simplicity, i opened the
door to dr. zimmermann myself and led him 
toward my private study. he paused to look at
the patio; the black and white tiles, the two
magnolia trees, and the wellhead drew his
admiration. he was, i think, a bit nervous.
there was nothing particularly striking about
him; he was a man in his forties with a rather
large head. his eyes were hidden by dark
glasses, which he would occasionally lay on the
table and then put back on again. when we
shook hands, i noted with some satisfaction
that i was the taller, but i was immediately
ashamed of my smugness, since this was not to
be a physical or even spiritual duel, but simply a
mise au point, a "getting down to brass tacks,"
as some might say, though perhaps a rather
uncomfortable one. i am a poor observer, but i
do recall what a certain poet once called, with
ugliness befitting the thing described, his
"inelegant sartorial arrangements."
i can still see his bright blue suit, much
encumbered with buttons and pockets. his
necktie, i noticed, was one of those stage
magician's bow ties attached with two plastic
clips. he was carrying a leather briefcase that i 
assumed was full of documents. he wore a welltrimmed,
military-style mustache; during the
course of our conversation he lighted a cigar,
and at that, i felt there were too many things on
that face. trop meublé, i said to myself.
the linear nature of language, wherein each
word occupies its own place on the page and its
own instant in the reader's mind, unduly
distorts the things we would make reference to;
in addition to the visual trivialities that i have
listed, the man gave one the impression of a
past dogged by adversity.
on the wall in my office hangs an oval
portrait of my great-grandfather, who fought in
the wars of independence, and there are one or
two glass cases around the room, containing
swords, medals, and flags. i showed
zimmermann those old objets de la gloire and
explained where some of them had come from;
he would look at them quickly, like a man
performing his duty, and (not without some
impertinence, though i believe it was an
involuntary and mechanical tic) complete my
information. he would say, for example: 
"correct. battle of junin. august 6, 1824.
cavalry charge under juárez."
"suárez," i corrected.
i suspect that the error was deliberate.
"my first error," he exclaimed, opening his
arms in an oriental gesture, "and assuredly not
my last! i live upon texts, and i get hopelessly
muddled; in you, however, the fascinating past
quite literally lives."
he pronounced the v almost as if it were an f.
such fawning did not endear the man to me.
zimmermann found my books more
interesting. his eyes wandered over the titles
almost lovingly, and i recall that he said:
"ah, schopenhauer, who never believed in
history.... in prague i had that same edition,
grisebach's, and i believed that i would grow
old in the company of those volumes that were
so comfortable in one's hand—but it was
history itself, embodied in one senseless man,
that drove me from that house and that city.
and here i am in the new world, in your
lovely home, with you...."
he spoke the language fluently, but not
without error; a noticeable german accent
coexisted with the lisping s's of the spanish
peninsula.
we had taken a seat by now, and i seized
upon those last words in order to get down to
our business.
"here, history is kinder," i said. "i expect to
die in this house, where i was born. it was to
this house that my great-grandfather, who had
been all over the continent, returned when he
brought home that sword; it is in this house
that i have sat to contemplate the past and
write my books. i might almost say that i have
never left this library—but now, at last, i am to
leave it, to journey across the landscape i have
only traveled on maps."
i softened my possible rhetorical excess with
a smile.
"are you referring to a certain caribbean
republic?" zimmermann asked.
"quite right," i replied. "i believe that it is to
that imminent journey that i owe the honor of
your visit."
trinidad brought in coffee. 
"you are surely aware," i went on with slow
assurance, "that the minister has entrusted me
with the mission of transcribing and writing an
introduction to the letters of bolivar that chance
has disinterred from the files of dr. avellanos.
this mission, with a sort of fortunate fatality,
crowns my life's labor, the labor that is
somehow in my blood."
it was a relief to me to have said what i had
to say. zimmermann seemed not to have heard
me; his eyes were on not my face but the books
behind me. he nodded vaguely, and then more
emphatically.
"in your blood. you are the true historian.
your family roamed the lands of the americas
and fought great battles, while mine, obscure,
was barely emerging from the ghetto. history
flows in your veins, as you yourself so
eloquently say; all you have to do is listen,
attentively, to that occult voice. i, on the other
hand, must travel to sulaco and attempt to
decipher stacks and stacks of papers—papers
which may finally turn out to be apocryphal.
believe me, professor, when i say i envy you." 
i could sense no trace of mockery in those
words; they were simply the expression of a will
that made the future as irrevocable as the past.
zimmermann's arguments were the least of it,
however; the power lay in the man, not in the
dialectic. he continued with a pedagogue's
deliberateness:
"in all things regarding bolivar—san martin,
i mean, of course—your own position, my dear
professor, is universally acknowledged. votre
siège est fait, l have not yet read the letter in
question, but it is inevitable, or certainly
reasonable, to hypothesize that bolivar wrote it
as self-justification. at any rate, the muchtalked-about
epistle will reveal to us only what
we might call the bolivar—not san martin—side
of the matter. once it is published, it will have
to be weighed, examined, passed through the
critical sieve, as it were, and, if necessary,
refuted. there is no one more qualified to hand
down that ultimate verdict than yourself, with
your magnifying glass. and scalpel! if scientific
rigor so requires! allow me furthermore to add
that the name of the person who presents the
letter to the world will always remain linked to
the letter. there is no way, professor, that such
a yoking can be in your interest. the common
reader does not readily perceive nuances."
i now realize that our subsequent debate was
essentially pointless. perhaps i even sensed as
much then; in order not to face that possibility,
i grasped at one thing he had said and asked
zimmermann whether he really believed the
letters were apocryphal.
"even if they were written by bolivar
himself," he replied, "—that does not mean they
contain the whole truth. bolivar may have
wished to delude his correspondent, or may
simply have been deluding himself.
you, a historian, a contemplative, know
better than i that the mystery lies within ourselves,
and not in words."
the man's grandiloquent generalities
irritated me, so i curtly observed that within the
great enigma that surrounds us, the meeting in
guayaquil, in which gen. san martin
renounced mere ambition and left the fate of
the continent in the hands of bolivar, is also an 
enigma worth studying.
"there are so many explanations…"
zimmermann replied. "there are those who
speculate that san martin fell into a trap.
others, such as sarmiento, contend that he was
in essence a european soldier, lost on a
continent he never understood; others still—
argentines, generally—maintain that he acted
out of abnegation; yet others, out of weariness.
there are even those who speak of a secret
order from some masonic lodge."
i remarked that be all that as it might, it
would be interesting to recover the precise
words spoken between the protector of peru
and the liberator of the americas.
"it is possible," zimmermann pontificated,
"that the words they exchanged were trivial.
two men met in guayaquil; if one prevailed, it
was because he possessed the stronger will, not
because of dialectical games. as you see, i have
not forgotten my schopenhauer."
then, with a smile he added:
"words, words, words. shakespeare, the
unparalleled master of words, held them in
contempt. in guayaquil or in buenos aires, or
in prague, they always count for less than
people do."
at that moment i felt that something was
happening—or rather, that something had
already happened.
somehow, we were now different. twilight
was stealing upon the room and i had not
lighted the lamps.
a little aimlessly i asked:
"you are from prague, professor?"
"i was from prague," he answered.
in order to avoid the central subject, i
remarked:
"it must be a strange city. i am not familiar
with it, but the first book i ever read in german
was the golem, by meyrink."
"that is the only book by gustav meyrink
that deserves to be remembered," zimmermann
replied. "the others, which are concoctions of
bad literature and worse theosophy, one is best
not to like.
nevertheless, there is something of prague's
strangeness to be found in that book of dreams 
dissolving into further dreams. everything is
strange in prague—or, if you prefer, nothing is
strange. anything can happen. in london one
afternoon, i had the same sensation."
"you mentioned will," i replied. "in the
mabinogion, you may recall, two kings are
playing chess on the summit of a hill, while on
the plain be-low, their armies clash in battle.
one of the kings wins the game; at that instant,
a horseman rides up with the news that the
other king's army has been defeated. the battle
of men on the battlefield below was the
reflection of the battle on the chessboard."
"ah, a magical operation," zimmermann
said.
"or the manifestation," i said, "of one will
acting upon two distinct battlegrounds. another
celtic legend tells of the duel of two famous
bards. one, accompanying himself on the harp,
sang from the coming of day to the coming of
twilight. then, when the stars or the moon
came out, the first bard handed the harp to the
second, who laid the instrument aside and rose
to his feet. the first singer admitted defeat." 
"what erudition! what power of synthesis!"
exclaimed zimmermann. then, in a calmer
voice, he added:
"i must confess my ignorance, my
lamentable ignorance, of la matière de
bretaigne. you, like the day, embrace both east
and west, while i hold down my small
carthaginian corner, which i now expand a bit
with a tentative step into new world history.
but i am a mere plodder."
the servility of the jew and the servility of
the german were in his voice, though i sensed
that it cost him nothing to defer to me, even
flatter me, given that the victory was his.
he begged me not to concern myself about
the arrangements for his trip. ("negotiatives"
was the horrendous word he used.) then in one
motion he extracted from his briefcase a letter
addressed to the minister, in which i explained
the reasons for my withdrawal and listed the
acknowledged virtues of dr. zimmermann, and
he laid in my hand his fountain pen so that i
might sign it. when he put the letter away, i
could not help seeing in his briefcase his
stamped ticket for the ezeiza-sulaco flight.
as he was leaving, he paused again before the
shelf of schopenhauer.
"our teacher, our master—our common
master—surmised that no act is unintentional.
if you remain in this house, in this elegant
patrician house, it is because deep inside, you
wish to. i respect your wish, and am grateful."
i received these final alms from
zimmermann without a word.
i went with him to the door.
"excellent coffee," he said, as we were saying
our good-byes.
i reread these disordered pages, which i will
soon be consigning to the fire. our interview
had been short.
i sense that now i will write no more. mon
siège est fait. 
the gospel according to mark
the incident took place on the los alamos
ranch, south of the small town of junin, in late
march of 1928. its protagonist was a medical
student named baltasar espinosa.*we might
define him for the moment as a buenos aires
youth much like many others, with no traits
worthier of note than the gift for public
speaking that had won him more than one prize
at the english school in ramos mejia* and an
almost unlimited goodness. he didn't like to
argue; he preferred that his interlocutor rather
than he himself be right. and though he found
the chance twists and turns of gambling
interesting, he was a poor gambler, because he
didn't like to win. he was intelligent and open
to learning, but he was lazy; at thirty-three he
had not yet completed the last requirements for
his degree. (the work he still owed,
incidentally, was for his favorite class.) his
father, like all the gentlemen of his day a freethinker,
had instructed espinosa in the
doctrines of herbert spencer, but once, before 
he set off on a trip to montevideo, his mother
had asked him to say the lord's prayer every
night and make the sign of the cross, and never
in all the years that followed did he break that
promise. he did not lack courage; one morning,
with more indifference than wrath, he had
traded two or three blows with some of his
classmates that were trying to force him to join
a strike at the university. he abounded in
debatable habits and opinions, out of a spirit of
acquiescence: his country mattered less to him
than the danger that people in other countries
might think the argentines still wore feathers;
he venerated france but had contempt for the
french; he had little respect for americans but
took pride in the fact that there were
skyscrapers in buenos aires; he thought that
the gauchos of the plains were better horsemen
than the gauchos of the mountains. when his
cousin daniel invited him to spend the summer
at los alamos, he immediately accepted—not
because he liked the country but out of a
natural desire to please, and because he could
find no good reason for saying no. 
the main house at the ranch was large and a
bit run-down; the quarters for the foreman, a
man named gutre, stood nearby. there were
three members of the gutre family: the father,
the son (who was singularly rough and
unpolished), and a girl of uncertain paternity.
they were tall, strong, and bony, with reddish
hair and indian features. they rarely spoke. the
fore-man's wife had died years before.
in the country, espinosa came to learn things
he hadn't known, had never even suspected; for
example, that when you're approaching a house
there's no reason to gallop and that nobody
goes out on a horse unless there's a job to be
done. as the summer wore on, he learned to
distinguish birds by their call.
within a few days, daniel had to go to
buenos aires to close a deal on some livestock.
at the most, he said, the trip would take a week.
espinosa, who was already a little tired of his
cousin's bonnes fortunes and his indefatigable
interest in the vagaries of men's tailoring,
stayed behind on the ranch with his textbooks.
the heat was oppressive, and not even nightfall 
brought relief. then one morning toward dawn,
he was awakened by thunder. wind lashed the
casuarina trees. espinosa heard the first drops
of rain and gave thanks to god. suddenly the
wind blew cold. that afternoon, the salado
overflowed.
the next morning, as he stood on the porch
looking out over the flooded plains, baltasar
espinosa realized that the metaphor equating
the pampas with the sea was not, at least that
morning, an altogether false one, though
hudson had noted that the sea seems the
grander of the two because we view it not from
horseback or our own height, but from the deck
of a ship. the rain did not let up; the gutres,
helped (or hindered) by the city dweller, saved a
good part of the livestock, though many animals
were drowned. there were four roads leading to
the ranch; all were under water. on the third
day, when a leaking roof threatened the
foreman's house, espinosa gave the gutres a
room at the back of the main house, alongside
the toolshed. the move brought espinosa and
the gutres closer, and they began to eat
together in the large dining room.
conversation was not easy; the gutres, who
knew so much about things in the country, did
not know how to explain them. one night
espinosa asked them if people still remembered
anything about the indian raids, back when the
military command for the frontier had been in
junin. they told him they did, but they would
have given the same answer if he had asked
them about the day charles i had been
beheaded. espinosa recalled that his father
used to say that all the cases of longevity that
occur in the country are the result of either poor
memory or a vague notion of dates—gauchos
quite often know neither the year they were
born in nor the name of the man that fathered
them.
in the entire house, the only reading material
to be found were several copies of a farming
magazine, a manual of veterinary medicine, a
deluxe edition of the romantic verse drama
tabaré, a copy of the history of the shorthorn
in argentina, several erotic and detective
stories, and a recent novel that espinosa had 
not read— don segundo sombra, by ricardo
guiraldes. in order to put some life into the
inevitable after-dinner attempt at conversation,
espinosa read a couple of chapters of the novel*
to the gutres,who did not know how to read or
write. unfortunately, the foreman had been a
cattle drover himself, and he could not be
interested in the adventures of another such a
one. it was easy work, he said; they always
carried along a pack mule with everything they
might need. if he had not been a cattle drover,
he announced, he'd never have seen lake
gomez, or the bragado river, or even the
nunez ranch, in chacabuco....
in the kitchen there was a guitar; before the
incident i am narrating, the laborers would sit
in a circle and someone would pick up the
guitar and strum it, though never managing
actually to play it. that was called "giving it a
strum."
espinosa, who was letting his beard grow
out, would stop before the mirror to look at his
changed face; he smiled to think that he'd soon
be boring the fellows in buenos aires with his
stories about the salado over-running its banks.
curiously, he missed places in the city he never
went, and would never go: a street corner on
cabrera where a mailbox stood; two cement
lions on a porch on calle jujuy a few blocks
from the plaza del once; a tile-floored corner
grocery-store-and-bar (whose location he
couldn't quite remember). as for his father and
his brothers, by now daniel would have told
them that he had been isolated—the word was
etymologically precise—by the floodwaters.
exploring the house still cut off by the high
water, he came upon a bible printed in english.
on its last pages the guthries (for that was their
real name) had kept their family history. they
had come originally from inverness and had
arrived in the new world—doubtlessly as
peasant laborers— in the early nineteenth
century; they had intermarried with indians.
the chronicle came to an end in the eighteenseventies;
they no longer knew how to write.
within a few generations they had forgotten
their english; by the time espinosa met them,
even spanish gave them some difficulty. they
had no faith, though in their veins, alongside
the superstitions of the pampas, there still ran a
dim current of the calvinist's harsh fanaticism.
espinosa mentioned his find to them, but they
hardly seemed to hear him.
he leafed through the book, and his fingers
opened it to the first verses of the gospel
according to st. mark. to try his hand at
translating, and perhaps to see if they might
understand a little of it, he decided that that
would be the text he read the gutres after
dinner. he was surprised that they listened first
attentively and then with mute fascination. the
presence of gold letters on the binding may
have given it increased authority. "it's in their
blood," he thought. it also occurred to him that
throughout history, humankind has told two
stories: the story of a lost ship sailing the
mediterranean seas in quest of a beloved isle,
and the story of a god who allows himself to be
crucified on golgotha. he recalled his elocution
classes in ramos mejia, and he rose to his feet
to preach the parables.
in the following days, the gutres would wolf 
down the spitted beef and canned sardines in
order to arrive sooner at the gospel.
the girl had a little lamb; it was her pet, and
she prettied it with a sky blue ribbon. one day it
cut itself on a piece of barbed wire; to stanch
the blood, the gutres were about to put
spiderwebs on the wound, but espinosa treated
it with pills. the gratitude awakened by that
cure amazed him. at first, he had not trusted
the gutres and had hidden away in one of his
books the two hundred forty pesos he'd
brought; now, with daniel gone, he had taken
the master's place and begun to give timid
orders, which were immediately followed. the
gutres would trail him through the rooms and
along the hallway, as though they were lost. as
he read, he noticed that they would sweep away
the crumbs he had left on the table.
one afternoon, he surprised them as they
were discussing him in brief, respectful words.
when he came to the end of the gospel
according to st. mark, he started to read
another of the three remaining gospels, but the
father asked him to reread the one he'd just
finished, so they could understand it better.
espinosa felt they were like children, who
prefer repetition to variety or novelty. one night
he dreamed of the flood (which is not
surprising) and was awakened by the
hammering of the building of the ark, but he
told himself it was thunder. and in fact the rain,
which had let up for a while, had begun again; it
was very cold. the gutres told him the rain had
broken through the roof of the toolshed; when
they got the beams repaired, they said, they'd
show him where. he was no longer a stranger, a
foreigner, and they all treated him with respect;
he was almost spoiled. none of them liked
coffee, but there was always a little cup for him,
with spoonfuls of sugar stirred in.
that second storm took place on a tuesday.
thursday night there was a soft knock on his
door; because of his doubts about the gutres he
always locked it. he got up and opened the
door; it was the girl. in the darkness he couldn't
see her, but he could tell by her footsteps that
she was barefoot, and afterward, in the bed,
that she was naked—that in fact she had come 
from the back of the house that way. she did
not embrace him, or speak a word; she lay down
beside him and she was shivering. it was the
first time she had lain with a man. when she
left, she did not kiss him; espinosa realized that
he didn't even know her name. impelled by
some sentiment he did not at-tempt to
understand, he swore that when he returned to
buenos aires, he'd tell no one of the incident.
the next day began like all the others, except
that the father spoke to espinosa to ask whether
christ had allowed himself to be killed in order
to save all mankind. espinosa, who was a
freethinker like his father but felt obliged to
defend what he had read them, paused.
"yes," he finally replied. "to save all
mankind from hell."
"what is hell?" gutre then asked him.
"a place underground where souls will burn
in fire forever."
"and those that drove the nails will also be
saved?"
"yes," replied espinosa, whose theology was
a bit shaky. (he had worried that the foreman 
wanted to have a word with him about what had
happened last night with his daughter.)
after lunch they asked him to read the last
chapters again.
espinosa had a long siesta that afternoon,
although it was a light sleep, interrupted by
persistent hammering and vague premonitions.
toward evening he got up and went out into the
hall.
"the water's going down," he said, as though
thinking out loud. "it won't be long now."
"not long now," repeated gutre, like an echo.
the three of them had followed him.
kneeling on the floor, they asked his blessing.
then they cursed him, spat on him, and drove
him to the back of the house. the girl was
weeping. espinosa realized what awaited him
on the other side of the door. when they
opened it, he saw the sky. a bird screamed; it's
a goldfinch, espinosa thought. there was no
roof on the shed; they had torn down the roof
beams to build the cross. 
brodie's report
tucked inside a copy, bought for me by my
dear friend paulino keins, of the first volume of
lane's translation of the thousand and one
nights (an arabian night's entertainment,
london, 1840), we discovered the manuscript
that i now make known to the world. the
meticulous penmanship—an art which
typewriters are teaching us to forget—suggests
that the note was written around that same
date.
lane, as we all know, lavished long
explanatory notes upon the tales; the margins
of this volume had been filled with additions,
question marks, and sometimes corrections, all
in the same hand as that of the manuscript.
from those marginalia, one might almost
conclude that the reader of the volume was less
interested in scheherazade's wondrous tales
than in the customs of islam. about david
brodie, whose signature (with its fine artistic
flourish) is affixed to the end of the manuscript, 
i have been able to discover nothing save that
he was a scottish missionary, born in aberdeen,
who preached christianity throughout central
africa and later in certain parts of the jungles of
brazil, a country to which he was led by his
knowledge of portuguese. i do not know when
or where he died. the manuscript has never, so
far as i know, been published.
i will reproduce the manuscript and its
colorless language verbatim, with no omissions
save the occasional verse from the bible and a
curious passage treating the sexual practices of
the yahoo, which brodie, a good presbyterian,
discreetly entrusted to latin. the first page of
the manuscript is missing.
...of the region infested by the apemen
is the area wherein one finds the
mich.
1
1the ch here has the sound of the ch in the
word loch. author's note.
lest my readers should forget the bestial
nature of this people (and also because, given
the absence of vowels in their harsh language, it
is impossible to transliterate their name
exactly), i will call them yahoos. the tribe
consists, i believe, of no more than seven
hundred individuals; this tally includes the nr,
who live farther south, in the dense
undergrowth of the jungle. the figure i give
here is conjectural, since with the exception of
the king, queen, and various witch doctors, the
yahoos sleep wherever they may find
themselves when night falls, in no fixed place.
marsh fever and the constant incursions of the
apemen have reduced their number. only a
very few have names. to call one another, they
fling mud at each other. i have also seen yahoos
fall to the ground and throw themselves about
in the dirt in order to call a friend. physically
they are no different from the kroo, except for
their lower forehead and a certain coppery cast
that mitigates the blackness of their skin. their
food is fruits, tubers, and reptiles; they drink
cat's and bat's milk and they fish with their
hands. they hide themselves when they eat, or
they close their eyes; all else, they do in plain
sight of all, like the cynic school of
philosophers. they devour the raw flesh of their 
witch doctors and kings in order to assimilate
their virtue to themselves. i upbraided them for
that custom; they touched their bellies and their
mouths, perhaps to indicate that dead men are
food as well, or perhaps— but this is no doubt
too subtle—to try to make me see that
everything we eat becomes, in time, human
flesh.
in their wars they use rocks, gathered and
kept at hand for that purpose, and magical
imprecations.
they walk about naked; the arts of clothing
and tattooing are unknown to them.
i find it worthy of note that while they have
at their disposal a broad expanse of grassy
tableland, with springs of fresh water and shady
trees, they have chosen to huddle together in
the swamps that surround the base of the
plateau, as though delighting in the rigors of
squalor and equatorial sun. furthermore, the
sides of the plateau are rugged, and would serve
as a wall against the apemen. in the scottish
highlands, clans build their castles on the
summit of a hill; i told the witch doctors of this 
custom, suggesting it as a model that they
might follow, but it was to no avail. they did,
however, allow me to erect a cabin for myself up
on the tableland, where the night breeze is
cooler.
the tribe is ruled over by a king whose power
is absolute, but i suspect that it is the four witch
doctors who assist the king and who in fact
elected him that actually rule. each male child
born is subjected to careful examination; if
certain stigmata (which have not been revealed
to me) are seen, the boy becomes king of the
yahoos. immediately upon his elevation he is
gelded, blinded with a fiery stick, and his hands
and feet are cut off, so that the world will not
distract him from wisdom. he is confined
within a cavern, whose name is citadel (qzr)*;
the only persons who may enter are the four
witch doctors and a pair of female slaves who
serve the king and smear his body with dung. if
there is a war, the witch doctors take him from
the cavern, exhibit him to the tribe to spur the
warriors' courage, sling him over their
shoulders, and carry him as though a banner or 
a talisman into the fiercest part of the battle.
when this occurs, the king generally dies within
seconds under the stones hurled at him by the
apemen.
in another such citadel lives the queen, who
is not permitted to see her king. the queen of
the yahoos was kind enough to receive me; she
was young, of a cheerful disposition, and,
insofar as her race allows, well favored.
bracelets made of metal and ivory and
necklaces strung with teeth adorned her
nakedness.
she looked at me, smelled me, and touched
me, and then—in full sight of her attendants—
she offered herself to me. my cloth and my
habits caused me to decline that honor, which is
one granted generally to the witch doctors and
to the slave hunters (usually muslims) whose
caravans pass through the kingdom.
she pricked me two or three times with a
long golden needle; these pricks are the royal
marks of favor, and not a few yahoos inflict
them upon themselves in order to make it
appear that they have been recipients of the 
queen's attentions. the ornaments which i have
mentioned come from other regions: the
yahoos believe them to be objects that occur in
nature, as they themselves are incapable of
manufacturing even the simplest item. in the
eyes of the tribe, my cabin was a tree, even
though many of them watched me build it, and
even aided me. among other items, i had with
me a watch, a pith helmet, a compass, and a
bible; the yahoos would look at these objects
and heft them and ask where i had found them.
they would often grasp my hunting knife by the
blade; one supposes they saw it differently than
i. it is difficult to imagine what they would
make of a chair. a house of several rooms would
be for them a labyrinth, though they well might
not get lost inside it, much as a cat is able to
find its way about a house though it cannot
conceive it. they all found my beard, which was
at that time flaming red, a thing of wonder; they
would stroke and caress it for long periods at a
time.
the yahoos are insensitive to pain and
pleasure, with the exception of the pleasure
they derive from raw and rancid meat and
noxious-smelling things. their lack of
imagination makes them cruel.
i have spoken of the king and queen; i will
now say something about the witch doctors. i
have mentioned that there are four of them; this
number is the largest that the yahoos'
arithmetic comprehends.
they count on their fingers thus: one, two,
three, four, many; infinity begins at the
thumb. the same phenomenon may be seen, i
am told, among the tribes that harass the region
of buenos-ayres with their raids and pillaging.
in spite of the fact that four is the largest
number they possess, the yahoos are not
cheated by the arabs who traffic with them, for
in their exchanges all the goods are divided into
lots of one, two, three, or four items, which each
person keeps beside himself. the operation is
slow, yet it allows no room for error or trickery.
of all the nation of the yahoos, the witch
doctors are the only persons who have truly
aroused my interest. the common people say
they have the power to transform anyone they
please into an ant or a tortoise; one individual
who noted my incredulity at this report showed
me an anthill, as though that were proof. the
yahoos have no memory, or virtually none; they
talk about the damage caused by an invasion of
leopards, but they are unsure whether they
themselves saw the leopards or whether it was
their parents, or whether they might be
recounting a dream. the witch doctors do
possess some memory, though to only a very
small degree; in the afternoon they can recall
things that happened that morning or even on
the previous evening. they also possess the
ability to see the future; they quite calmly and
assuredly predict what will happen in ten or
fifteen minutes. they may say, for example: a
fly will light on the back of my neck, or it
won't be long before we hear a bird start
singing. i have witnessed this curious gift
hundreds of times, and i have thought about it
a great deal. we know that past, present, and
future are already, in every smallest detail, in
the prophetic memory of god, in his eternity; it
is curious, then, that men may look indefinitely 
into the past but not an instant into the future.
if i am able to recall as though it were yesterday
that schooner that sailed into port from norway
when i was four years old, why should i be
surprised that someone is able to foresee an
event that is about to occur? philosophically
speaking, memory is no less marvelous than
prophesying the future; tomorrow is closer to us
than the crossing of the red sea by the jews,
which, nonetheless, we remember.
the tribesmen are forbidden to look at the
stars, a privilege reserved for the witch doctors.
each witch doctor has a disciple whom he
instructs from childhood in the secret
knowledge of the tribe and who succeeds him at
his death. thus there are always four—a
number with magical qualities, since it is the
highest number the mind of humankind may
attain. in their own way, they profess the
doctrine of heaven and hell. both are
subterranean. to hell, which is bright and dry,
shall go the sick, the old, the mistreated,
apemen, arabs, and leopards; to heaven, which
the yahoos imagine to be dark and marshlike,
shall go the king, the queen, the witch doctors,
those who have been happy, hardhearted, and
bloodthirsty on earth. they worship a god
whose name is dung; this god they may
possibly have conceived in the image of their
king, for the god is mutilated, blind, frail, and
possesses unlimited power.
it often assumes the body of an ant or a
serpent.
no one should be surprised, after reading
thus far in my account, that i succeeded in
converting not a single yahoo during the entire
period of my residence among them. the
phrase our father disturbed them, since they
lack any concept of paternity. they do not
understand that an act per-formed nine months
ago may somehow be related to the birth of a
child; they cannot conceive a cause so distant
and so unlikely. and then again, all women
engage in carnal commerce, though not all are
mothers.
their language is complex, and resembles
none other that i know. one cannot speak of
"parts of speech," as there are no sentences.
each monosyllabic word corresponds to a
general idea, which is defined by its context or
by facial expressions. the word nrz, for
example, suggests a dispersion or spots of one
kind or another: it may mean the starry sky, a
leopard, a flock of birds, smallpox, something
splattered with water or mud, the act of
scattering, or the flight that follows a defeat.
hrl, on the other hand, indicates that which is
compact, dense, or tightly squeezed together; it
may mean the tribe, the trunk of a tree, a stone,
a pile of rocks, the act of piling them up, a
meeting of the four witch doctors, sexual
congress, or a forest. pronounced in another
way, or with other facial expressions, it may
mean the opposite. we should not be overly
surprised at this: in our own tongue, the verb to
cleave means to rend and to adhere. of course,
there are no sentences, even incomplete ones.
the intellectual power of abstraction
demanded by such a language suggests to me
that the yahoos, in spite of their barbarity, are
not a primitive people but a degenerate one.
this conjecture is confirmed by inscriptions
which i have discovered up on the tableland.
the characters employed in these inscriptions,
resembling the runes that our own forebears
carved, can no longer be deciphered by the
tribe; it is as though the tribe had for-gotten the
written language and retained only the spoken
one.
the tribe's diversions are cat fights (between
animals trained for that purpose) and
executions. someone is accused of offending the
modesty of the queen or of having eaten within
sight of another; there is no testimony from
witnesses, no confession, and the king hands
down the sentence of guilty. the condemned
man is put to torments which i strive not to
recall, and then is stoned. the queen has the
right to throw the first stone and the last one,
which is ordinarily unnecessary. the people
applaud her in frenzy, lauding her skill and the
beauty of her person and flinging roses and
fetid things at her. the queen wordlessly smiles.
another of the tribe's customs is its poets. it
occurs to a man to string together six or seven
words, generally enigmatic. he cannot contain
himself, and so he shrieks them out as he
stands in the center of a circle formed by the
witch doctors and the tribesmen lying on the
ground. if the poem does not excite the tribe,
nothing happens, but if the words of the poet
surprise or astound the listeners, everyone
moves back from him, in silence, under a holy
dread. they feel that he has been touched by
the spirit; no one will speak to him or look at
him, not even his mother. he is no longer a
man, but a god, and anyone may kill him. the
new poet, if he is able, seeks refuge in the
deserts to the north.
i have already related how i came to the land
of the yahoos. the reader will recall that they
surrounded me, that i fired a rifle shot in the
air, and that they took the report for some sort
of magical thunder. in order to keep that error
alive, i made it a point never to walk about
armed. but one spring morning just at
daybreak, we were suddenly invaded by the
apemen; i ran down from my plateau, weapon
in hand, and killed two of those beasts. the rest
fled in terror. bullets, of course, work invisibly. 
for the first time in my life, i heard myself
applauded. it was then, i believe, that the queen
received me. the yahoos' memory is not to be
depended upon; that same afternoon i left. my
adventures in the jungle are of no concern; i
came at last upon a village of black men, who
were acquainted with plowing, sowing, and
praying, and with whom i could make myself
understood in portuguese. a romish
missionary, padre fernandes, took me most
hospitably into his cabin and cared for me until
i was able to continue my painful journey. at
first it caused me some revulsion to see him
undisguisedly open his mouth and put food in. i
would cover my eyes with my hands, or avert
them; in a few days i regained my old custom. i
recall with pleasure our debates on theological
questions. i could not persuade him to return to
the true faith of jesus.
i am writing this now in glasgow. i have told
of my stay among the yahoos, but not of its
essential horror, which never entirely leaves
me, and which visits me in dreams. in the
street, i sometimes think i am still among them. 
the yahoos, i know, are a barbarous people,
perhaps the most barbarous of the earth, but it
would be an injustice to overlook certain
redeeming traits which they possess. they have
institutions, and a king; they speak a language
based on abstract concepts; they believe, like
the jews and the greeks, in the divine origins of
poetry; and they sense that the soul survives the
death of the body.
they affirm the efficacy of punishment and
reward. they represent, in a word, culture, just
as we do, in spite of our many sins. i do not
regret having fought in their ranks against the
apemen. we have the obligation to save them. i
hope her majesty's government will not turn a
deaf ear to the remedy this report has the
temerity to suggest. 
the book of sand (1975)
the other
the incident occurred in february, 1969, in
cambridge, north of boston. i didn't write
about it then because my foremost objective at
the time was to put it out of my mind, so as not
to go insane. now, in 1972, it strikes me that if i
do write about what happened, people will read
it as a story and in time i, too, may be able to
see it as one.
i know that it was almost horrific while it
lasted—and it grew worse yet through the
sleepless nights that followed. that does not
mean that anyone else will be stirred by my
telling of it.
it was about ten o'clock in the morning. i was
sitting comfortably on a bench beside the
charles river.
some five hundred yards to my right there
was a tall building whose name i never learned.
large chunks of ice were floating down the gray 
current. inevitably, the river made me think of
time ... heraclitus' ancient image. i had slept
well; the class i'd given the previous evening
had, i think, managed to interest my students.
there was not a soul in sight.
suddenly, i had the sense (which
psychologists tell us is associated with states of
fatigue) that i had lived this moment before.
someone had sat down on the other end of my
bench. i'd have preferred to be alone, but i
didn't want to get up immediately for fear of
seeming rude. the other man had started
whistling. at that moment there occurred the
first of the many shocks that morning was to
bring me.
what the man was whistling—or trying to
whistle (i have never been able to carry a
tune)—was the popular argentine milonga la
tapera, by elias regules. the tune carried me
back to a patio that no longer exists and to the
memory of alvaro melián lafinur, who died so
many years ago. then there came the words.
they were the words of the décima that begins
the song. the voice was not alvaro's but it tried 
to imitate alvaro's. i recognized it with horror.
i turned to the man and spoke.
"are you uruguayan or argentine?"
"argentine, but i've been living in geneva
since '14," came the reply.
there was a long silence. then i asked a
second question.
"at number seventeen malagnou, across the
street from the russian orthodox church?"
he nodded.
"in that case" i resolutely said to him, "your
name is jorge luis borges. i too am jorge luis
borges. we are in 1969, in the city of
cambridge."
"no," he answered in my own, slightly
distant, voice, "i am here in geneva, on a bench,
a few steps from the rhône."
then, after a moment, he went on:
"it is odd that we look so much alike, but you
are much older than i, and you have gray hair."
"i can prove to you that i speak the truth," i
answered. "i'll tell you things that a stranger
couldn't know.
in our house there's a silver mate cup with a 
base of serpents that our great-grandfather
brought from peru. there's also a silver
washbasin that was hung from the saddle. in
the wardrobe closet in your room, there are two
rows of books: the three volumes of lane's
translation of the thousand and one nights —
which lane called the arabian nights
entertainment —with steel engravings and
notes in fine print between the chapters,
quicherat's latin dictionary, tacitus' germania
in latin and in gordon's english version, a
quixote in the gamier edition, a copy of rivera
indarte's tablas de sangre signed by the
author, carlyle's sartor resartus, a biography
of amiel, and, hidden behind the others, a
paperbound volume detailing the sexual
customs of the balkans. nor have i forgotten a
certain afternoon in a second-floor apartment
on the plaza dubourg."
"dufour" he corrected me.
"all right, dufour," i said. "is that enough for
you?"
"no," he replied. "those 'proofs' of yours
prove nothing. if i'm dreaming you, it's only
natural that you would know what i know. that
long-winded catalog of yours is perfectly
unavailing."
his objection was a fair one.
"if this morning and this encounter are
dreams," i replied, "then each of us does have to
think that he alone is the dreamer. perhaps our
dream will end, perhaps it won't. meanwhile,
our clear obligation is to accept the dream, as
we have accepted the universe and our having
been brought into it and the fact that we see
with our eyes and that we breathe."
"but what if the dream should last?" he asked
anxiously.
in order to calm him—and calm myself, as
well—i feigned a self-assurance i was far from
truly feeling.
"my dream," i told him, "has already lasted
for seventy years. and besides—when one
wakes up, the person one meets is always
oneself. that is what's happening to us now,
except that we are two.
wouldn't you like to know something about
my past, which is now the future that awaits
you?"
he nodded wordlessly. i went on, a bit
hesitatingly:
"mother is well, living happily in her house
in buenos aires, on the corner of charcas and
maipú, but father died some thirty years ago. it
was his heart. he had had a stroke—that was
what finally killed him. when he laid his left
hand over his right, it was like a child's hand
resting atop a giant's. he died impatient for
death, but without a word of complaint. our
grandmother had died in the same house.
several days before the end, she called us all
in and told us, 'i am an old, old woman, dying
very slowly.
i won't have anyone making a fuss over such
a common, ordinary thing as that.' norah, your
sister, is married and has two children. by the
way—at home, how is everyone?"
"fine. father still always making his jokes
against religion. last night he said jesus was
like the gauchos, who'll never commit
themselves, which is why he spoke in parables."
he thought for a moment, and then asked:
"what about you?"
"i'm not sure exactly how many books you'll
write, but i know there are too many. you'll
write poetry that will give you a pleasure that
others will not fully share, and stories of a
fantastic turn. you will be a teacher—like your
father, and like so many others of our blood."
i was glad he didn't ask me about the success
or failure of the books. i then changed my tack.
"as for history ... there was another war,
with virtually the same antagonists. france
soon capitulated; england and america battled
a german dictator named hitler—the cyclical
battle of waterloo. buenos aires engendered
another rosas in 1946, much like our kinsman
in the first one.* in '55, the province of córdoba
saved us, as entre ríos had before. things are
bad now. russia is taking over the planet;
america, hobbled by the superstition of
democracy, can't make up its mind to be an
empire. our own country is more provincial
with every passing day—more provincial and
more self-important, as though it had shut its
eyes. i shouldn't be surprised if the teaching of 
latin were replaced by the teaching of
guaraní."
i realized that he was barely listening. the
elemental fear of the impossible yet true had
come over him, and he was daunted. i, who
have never been a father, felt a wave of love for
that poor young man who was dearer to me
than a child of my own flesh and blood. i saw
that his hands were clutching a book. i asked
what he was reading.
"the possessed—or, as i think would be
better, the devils, by fyodor dostoievsky," he
answered without vanity.
"it's a bit hazy to me now. is it any good?"
the words were hardly out of my mouth
when i sensed that the question was
blasphemous.
"the great russian writer," he affirmed
sententiously, "has penetrated more deeply
than any other man into the labyrinths of the
slavic soul."
i took that rhetorical pronouncement as
evidence that he had grown calmer.
i asked him what other works by dostoievsky 
he had read.
he ticked off two or three, among them the
double.
i asked him whether he could tell the
difference between the characters when he
read, as one could with joseph conrad, and
whether he planned to read on through
dostoievsky's entire corpus.
"the truth is, i don't," he answered with a
slight note of surprise.
i asked him what he himself was writing, and
he told me he was working on a book of poetry
to be called red anthems.
he'd also thought about calling it red
rhythms or red songs.
"why not?" i said. "you can cite good
authority for it—rubén darío's blue poetry and
verlaine's gray song."
ignoring this, he clarified what he'd meant—
his book would be a hymn to the brotherhood of
all mankind. the modern poet cannot turn his
back on his age.
i thought about this for a while, and then
asked if he really felt that he was brother to
every living person—every undertaker, for
example? every letter carrier? every undersea
diver, everybody that lives on the evennumbered
side of the street, all the people with
laryngitis? (the list could go on.) he said his
book would address the great oppressed and
outcast masses.
"your oppressed and outcast masses," i
replied, "are nothing but an abstraction. only
individuals exist—if, in fact, anyone does.
yesterday's man is not today's, as some greek
said. we two, here on this bench in geneva or
in cambridge, are perhaps the proof of that."
except in the austere pages of history,
memorable events go unaccompanied by
memorable phrases. a man about to die tries to
recall a print that he glimpsed in his childhood;
soldiers about to go into battle talk about the
mud or their sergeant. our situation was unique
and, frankly, we were unprepared. we talked,
inevitably, about literature; i fear i said no
more than i customarily say to journalists. my
alter ego believed in the imagination, in
creation—in the discovery of new metaphors; i 
myself believed in those that correspond to
close and widely acknowledged likenesses,
those our imagination has already accepted: old
age and death, dreams and life, the flow of time
and water. i informed the young man of this
opinion, which he himself was to express in a
book, years later.
but he was barely listening. then suddenly
he spoke.
"if you have been me, how can you explain
the fact that you've forgotten that you once
encountered an elderly gentleman who in 1918
told you that he, too was borges?"
i hadn't thought of that difficulty. i answered
with conviction.
"perhaps the incident was so odd that i made
an effort to forget it."
he ventured a timid question.
"how's your memory?"
i realized that for a mere boy not yet twenty,
a man of seventy some-odd years was
practically a corpse.
"it's often much like forgetfulness," i
answered, "but it can still find what it's sent to 
find. i'm studying anglo-saxon, and i'm not at
the foot of the class."
by this time our conversation had lasted too
long to be conversation in a dream.
i was struck by a sudden idea.
"i can prove to you this minute," i said, "that
you aren't dreaming me. listen to this line of
poetry. so far as i can recall, you've never heard
it before."
i slowly intoned the famous line: "l'hydreunivers
tordant son corpse caillé d'astres."
i could sense his almost fear-stricken
bafflement. he repeated the line softly, savoring
each glowing word.
"it's true," he stammered, "i could never
write a line like that."
hugo had brought us together.
i now recall that shortly before this, he had
fervently recited that short poem in which
whitman recalls a night shared beside the sea—
a night when whitman had been truly happy.
"if whitman sang of that night," i observed,
"it's because he desired it but it never
happened. the poem gains in greatness if we
sense that it is the expression of a desire, a
longing, rather than the narration of an event."
he stared at me.
"you don't know him," he exclaimed.
"whitman is incapable of falsehood."*
a half century does not pass without leaving
its mark. beneath our conversation, the
conversation of two men of miscellaneous
readings and diverse tastes, i realized that we
would not find common ground. we were too
different, yet too alike. we could not deceive
one another, and that makes conversation hard.
each of us was almost a caricature of the
other. the situation was too unnatural to last
much longer.
there was no point in giving advice, no point
in arguing, because the young man's inevitable
fate was to be the man that i am now.
suddenly i recalled a fantasy by coleridge. a
man dreams that he is in paradise, and he is
given a flower as proof. when he wakes up,
there is the flower.
i hit upon an analogous stratagem.
"listen," i said, "do you have any money?" 
"yes," he replied. "about twenty francs. i
invited simón jichlinskito have dinner with me
at the crocodile tonight."
"tell simón that he'll practice medicine in
carouge, and that he will do a great deal of
good... now, give me one of your coins."
he took three silver pieces and several
smaller coins out of his pocket. he held out one
of the silver pieces to me; he didn't understand.
i handed him one of those ill-advised
american bills that are all of the same size
though of very different denominations. he
examined it avidly.
"impossible!" he cried. "it's dated 1964."
(months later someone told me that
banknotes are not dated.)
"this, all this, is a miracle," he managed to
say. "and the miraculous inspires fear. those
who witnessed the resurrection of lazarus must
have been terrified."
we haven't changed a bit, i thought. always
referring back to books.
he tore the bill to shreds and put the coin
back in his pocket. 
i had wanted to throw the coin he gave me in
the river. the arc of the silver coin disappearing
into the silver river would have lent my story a
vivid image, but fate would not have it.
i replied that the supernatural, if it happens
twice, is no longer terrifying; i suggested that
we meet again the next day, on that same bench
that existed in two times and two places.
he immediately agreed, then said, without
looking at his watch, that it was getting late, he
had to be going. both of us were lying, and each
of us knew that the other one was lying. i told
him that someone was coming to fetch me.
"fetch you?" he queried.
"yes. when you reach my age, you'll have
almost totally lost your eyesight. you'll be able
to see the color yellow, and light and shadow.
but don't worry. gradual blindness is not tragic.
it's like the slowly growing darkness of a
summer evening."
we parted without having touched one
another. the next day, i did not go to the bench.
the other man probably didn't, either.
i have thought a great deal about this
encounter, which i've never told anyone about.
i believe i have discovered the key to it. the
encounter was real, but the other man spoke to
me in a dream, which was why he could forget
me; i spoke to him while i was awake, and so i
am still tormented by the memory.
the other man dreamed me, but did not
dream me rigorously —he dreamed, i now
realize, the impossible date on that dollar bill.
ulrikke
hann tekr sverthtt gram ok leggri methal their
abert
volsunga saga, 27
my story will be faithful to reality, or at least
to my personal recollection of reality, which is
the same thing. the events took place only a
short while ago, but i know that the habit of
literature is also the habit of interpolating
circumstantial details and accentuating certain
emphases. i wish to tell the story of my
encounter with ulrikke (i never learned her last
name, and perhaps never will) in the city of
york. the tale will span one night and one
morning.
it would be easy for me to say that i saw her
for the first time beside the five sisters at york
minster, those stained glass panes devoid of
figural representation that cromwell's
iconoclasts left untouched, but the fact is that
we met in the dayroom of the northern inn,
which lies outside the walls. there were but a
few of us in the room, and she had her back to
me. some-one offered her a glass of sherry and
she refused it.
"i am a feminist," she said. "i have no desire
to imitate men. i find their tobacco and their
alcohol repulsive."
the pronouncement was an attempt at wit,
and i sensed this wasn't the first time she'd
voiced it. i later learned that it was not like
her—but what we say is not always like us.
she said she'd arrived at the museum late,
but that they'd let her in when they learned she
was norwegian. 
"not the first time the norwegians storm
york," someone remarked.
"quite right," she said. "england was ours
and we lost her—if, that is, anyone can possess
anything or anything can really be lost."
it was at that point that i looked at her. a
line somewhere in william blake talks about
girls of soft silver or furious gold, but in ulrikke
there was both gold and softness. she was light
and tall, with sharp features and gray eyes. less
than by her face, i was impressed by her air of
calm mystery. she smiled easily, and her smile
seemed to take her somewhere far away. she
was dressed in black—unusual in the lands of
the north, which try to cheer the dullness of the
surroundings with bright colors. she spoke a
neat, precise english, slightly stressing the r’s. i
am no great observer; i discovered these things
gradually.
we were introduced. i told her i was a
professor at the university of the andes, in
bogotá. i clarified that i myself was colombian.
"what is 'being colombian'?"
"i'm not sure," i replied. "it's an act of faith." 
"like being norwegian," she said, nodding.
i can recall nothing further of what was said
that night. the next day i came down to the
dining room early. i saw through the windows
that it had snowed; the moors ran on
seamlessly into the morning.
there was no one else in the dining room.
ulrikke invited me to share her table. she told
me she liked to go out walking alone.
i remembered an old quip of
schopenhauer's.
"i do too. we can go out alone together," i
said.
we walked off away from the house through
the newly fallen snow. there was not a soul
abroad in the fields. i suggested we go
downriver a few miles, to thorgate. i know i
was in love with ulrikke; there was no other
person on earth i'd have wanted beside me.
suddenly i heard the far-off howl of a wolf. i
have never heard a wolf howl, but i know that it
was a wolf. ulrikke's expression did not change.
after a while she said, as though thinking out
loud:
"the few shabby swords i saw yesterday in
york minster were more moving to me than the
great ships in the museum at oslo."
our two paths were briefly crossing: that
evening ulrikke was to continue her journey
toward london; i, toward edinburgh.
"on oxford street," she said, "i will retrace
the steps of dequincey, who went seeking his
lost anna among the crowds of london."
"dequincey," i replied, "stopped looking. my
search for her, on the other hand, continues,
through all time."
"perhaps," ulrikke said softly, "you have
found her."
i realized that an unforeseen event was not to
be forbidden me, and i kissed her lips and her
eyes. she pushed me away with gentle firmness,
but then said:
"i shall be yours in the inn at thorgate. i ask
you, meanwhile, not to touch me. it's best that
way."
for a celibate, middle-aged man, proffered
love is a gift that one no longer hopes for; a
miracle has the right to impose conditions. i
recalled my salad days in popayán and a girl
from texas, as bright and slender as ulrikke,
who had denied me her love.
i did not make the mistake of asking her
whether she loved me. i realized that i was not
the first, and would not be the last. that
adventure, perhaps the last for me, would be
one of many for that glowing, determined
disciple of ibsen.
we walked on, hand in hand.
"all this is like a dream," i said, "and i never
dream."
"like that king," ulrikke replied, "who never
dreamed until a sorcerer put him to sleep in a
pigsty."
then she added:
"ssh! a bird is about to sing."
in a moment we heard the birdsong.
"in these lands," i said, "people think that a
person who's soon to die can see the future."
"and i'm about to die," she said.
i looked at her, stunned.
"lets cut through the woods," i urged her.
"we'll get to thorgate sooner." 
"the woods are dangerous," she replied.
we continued across the moors.
"i wish this moment would last forever," i
murmured.
"forever is a word mankind is forbidden to
speak," ulrikke declared emphatically, and
then, to soften her words, she asked me to tell
her my name again, which she hadn't heard
very well.
"javier otárola," i said.
she tried to repeat it, but couldn't. i failed,
likewise, with ulrikke.
"i will call you sigurd," she said with a smile.
"and if i'm to be sigurd," i replied, "then you
shall be brunhild."
her steps had slowed.
"do you know the saga?" i asked.
"of course," she said. "the tragic story that
the germans spoiled with their parvenu
nibelungen."
i didn't want to argue, so i answered:
"brunhild, you are walking as though you
wanted a sword to lie between us in our bed."
we were suddenly before the inn. i was not 
surprised to find that it, like the one we had
departed from, was called the northern inn.
from the top of the staircase, ulrikke called
down to me: "did you hear the wolf? there are
no wolves in england anymore. hurry up."
as i climbed the stairs, i noticed that the
walls were papered a deep crimson, in the style
of william morris, with intertwined birds and
fruit. ulrikke entered the room first. the dark
chamber had a low, peaked ceiling. the
expected bed was duplicated in a vague glass,
and its burnished mahogany reminded me of
the mirror of the scriptures. ulrikke had
already undressed. she called me by my true
name, javier. i sensed that the snow was
coming down harder. now there was no more
furniture, no more mirrors. there was no sword
between us. like sand, time sifted away.
ancient in the dimness flowed love, and for the
first and last time, i possessed the image of
ulrikke. 
the congress
ils s'acheminèrent vers un château
immense, au frontispice duquel on lisait: "je
n'appartiens à personne etj'appartiens à tout le
monde. vous y étiez avant que d'y entrer, et
vous y serez encore quand vous en sortirez."
diderot: jacques le fataliste et son maître
(1769)
my name is alexander ferri. there are
martial echoes in the name, but neither the
trumpets of glory nor the great shadow of the
macedonian (the phrase is borrowed from the
author of los mármoles, whose friendship i am
honored to claim) accord very well with the
gray, modest man who weaves these lines on
the top floor of a hotel on calle santiago del
estero in a southside that's no longer the
southside it once was. any day now will mark
the anniversary of my birth more than seventy
years ago; i am still giving english lessons to
very small classes of students. indecisiveness or
oversight, or perhaps other reasons, led to my
never marrying, and now i am alone. i do not
mind solitude; after all, it is hard enough to live
with oneself and one's own peculiarities. i can
tell that i am growing old; one unequivocal sign
is the fact that i find novelty neither interesting
nor surprising, perhaps because i see nothing
essentially new in it—it's little more than timid
variations on what's already been. when i was
young, i was drawn to sunsets, slums, and
misfortune; now it is to mornings in the heart of
the city and tranquility. i no longer play at
being hamlet. i have joined the conservative
party and a chess club, which i attend as a
spectator—sometimes an absentminded one.
the curious reader may exhume, from some
obscure shelf in the national library on calle
méxico, a copy of my book a brief examination
of the analytical language of john wilkins, a
work which ought to be republished if only to
correct or mitigate its many errors. the new
director of the library, i am told, is a literary
gentleman who has devoted himself to the
study of antique languages, as though the
languages of today were not sufficiently
primitive, and to the demagogical glorification
of an imaginary buenos aires of knife fighters. i
have never wished to meet him. i arrived in this
city in 1899, and fate has brought me face to
face with a knife fighter, or an individual with a
reputation as one, exactly once. later, if the
occasion presents itself, i will relate that
incident.
i have said that i am alone; a few days ago, a
fellow resident here in the hotel, having heard
me talk about fermín eguren, told me that he
had recently died, in punta del ester.
i find my sadness over the death of that man
(who most emphatically was never my friend)
to be curiously stubborn. i know that i am
alone; i am the world's only custodian of the
memory of that gets that was the congress, a
memory i shall never share again. i am now its
only delegate. it is true that all mankind are
delegates, that there is not a soul on the planet
who is not a delegate, yet i am a member of the
congress in another way— i know i am; that is
what makes me different from all my
innumerable colleagues, present and future. it 
is true that on february 7, 1904, we swore by all
that's sacred—is there anything on earth that is
sacred, or anything that's not?—that we would
never reveal the story of the congress, but it is
no less true that the fact that i am now a
perjurer is also part of the congress. that
statement is unclear, but it may serve to pique
my eventual readers' curiosity.
at any rate, the task i have set myself is not
an easy one. i have never attempted to produce
narrative prose, even in its epistolary form; to
make matters worse, no doubt, the story i am
about to tell is not believable. it was the pen of
josé fernández kraal, the undeservedly
forgotten poet of los mármoles, that fate had
destined for this enterprise, but now it is too
late. i will not deliberately misrepresent the
facts, but i can foresee that sloth and
clumsiness will more than once lead me into
error.
the exact dates are of no importance. i
would remind the reader that i came here from
santa fe, the province of my birth, in 1899. i
have never gone back; i have grown accustomed 
to buenos aires (a city i am not, however,
particularly fond of) like a person grown
accustomed to his own body, or an old ache. i
sense, though i find little interest in the fact,
that my death is near; i should, therefore, hold
in check my tendency to digress, and get on
with telling the story.
years do not change our essence, if in fact we
have an essence; the impulse that led me one
night to the congress of the world was that
same impulse that had initially betaken me to
the city room of the newspaper ultimo hora*
for a poor young man from the provinces,
being a newspaperman can be a romantic life,
much as a poor young man from the big city
might conceive a gaucho's life to be romantic, or
the life of a peon on his little piece of land. i am
not embarrassed to have wanted to be a
journalist, a profession which now strikes me as
trivial. i recall having heard my colleague
fernández kraal say that the journalist writes
to be forgotten, while he himself wanted to
write to be remembered, and to last. by then he
had already sculpted (the word was in common 
use) some of the perfect sonnets that were to
appear sometime later, with the occasional
slight re-touching, in the pages of los
mármoles.
i cannot put my finger on the first time i
heard someone mention the congress. it may
have been that evening when the paymaster
paid me my monthly salary and to celebrate
that proof that i was now a part of buenos aires
i invited kraal to have dinner with me. kraal
said he was sorry, he couldn't that night, he
couldn't miss the congress. i immediately
realized that he was not referring to that
pompous, dome-capped building at the far end
of an avenue on which so many spaniards chose
to live, but rather to something more secret,
and more important. people talked about the
congress—some with open contempt, others
with lowered voices, still others with alarm or
curiosity; all, i believe, in ignorance. a few
saturdays later, kraal invited me to go with
him. he had seen, he said, to all the necessary
arrangements.
it was somewhere between nine and ten at
night. on the trolley, kraal told me that the
preliminary meetings took place on saturday
and that don alejandro glencoe, perhaps
inspired by my name, had already given leave
for me to attend. we went into the cafeteria del
gas.* the delegates, some fifteen or twenty i
would say, were sitting around a long table; i
am not certain whether there was a raised dais
or whether memory has added it. i recognized
the chairman immediately, though i had never
seen him before. don alejandro was a
gentleman of dignified air, well past middle age,
with a wide, frank forehead, gray eyes, and a
red beard flecked generously with white. i never
saw him in anything but a dark frock coat; he
tended to sit with his crossed hands resting on
his walking stick. he was tall, and robustlooking.
to his left sat a much younger man,
likewise with red hair; the violent color of this
latter fellow's hair suggested fire, however,
while the color of glencoe's beard was more like
autumn leaves.
to glencoe's right sat a young man with a
long face and a singularly low forehead, and
quite the dandy.
everyone had ordered coffee; one and
another had also ordered absinthe. the first
thing that caught my attention was the presence
of a woman, the only one among so many men.
at the other end of the tablet here was a boy
about ten years old, dressed in a sailor suit; he
soon fell asleep. there were also a protestant
minister, two unequivocal jews, and a negro
with a silk kerchief and very tight clothing in
the style street corner toughs affected in those
days. before the negro and the boy there sat
cups of chocolate. i cannot recall the others,
except for one sr. marcelo del mazo, a man of
exquisite manners and cultured conversation,
whom i never saw again. i still have a blurred
and unsatisfactory photograph of one of the
meetings, though i shan't publish it because the
clothing of the period, the hair and mustaches,
would leave a comical and even seedy
impression that would misrepresent the scene.
all organizations tend to create their own
dialects and their own rituals; the congress,
which was always slightly dreamlike to me,
apparently wanted its delegates to discover
gradually, and without haste, the goal that the
congress sought, and even the christian names
and patronymics of their colleagues. i soon
realized that i was under an obligation not to
ask questions, and so i abstained from
questioning fernández irala, who for his own
part volunteered nothing. i missed not a single
saturday, but a month or two passed before i
understood. from the second meeting on, the
person who sat next to me was donald wren,
an engineer for the southern railway, who
would later give me english lessons.
don alejandro spoke very little; the others
did not address him directly, but i sensed that
they were speaking for his benefit and sought
his approval. a wave of his slow hand sufficed
to change the subject of discussion. little by
little i discovered that the red-haired man to his
left bore the odd name twirl. i recall the
impression of frailty he gave—the characteristic
of certain very tall men, as though their height
gave them vertigo and made them stoop. his
hands, i recall, often toyed with a copper
compass, which from time to time he would set
on the table. he died in late 1914, an
infantryman in an irish regiment.
the man who always sat at don alejandro's
right was the beetle-browed young man, fermín
eguren, the chairman's nephew. i am not a
believer in the methods of realism, an artificial
genre if ever there was one; i prefer to reveal
from the very beginning, and once and for all,
what i only gradually came to know. but before
that, i want to remind the reader of my
situation at that time: i was a poor young man
from camilla, the son of farmers; i had made
my way to buenos aires and suddenly found
myself, or so i felt, at the very center of that
great city—perhaps, who can say, at the center
of the world. a half century has passed, yet i
still feel that first sense of dazzled
bewilderment—which would by no means be
the last. these, then, are the facts; i will relate
them very briefly: don alejandro glencoe, the
chairman, was a rancher from the eastern
province,* the owner of a country estate on the
border with brazil. his father, originally from 
aberdeen, had settled in south america in the
middle of the last century. he had brought with
him some hundred or so books— the only
books, i daresay, that don alejandro had ever
read in his life. (i mention these heterogeneous
books, which i have held in my own hands,
because one of them contained the seed from
which my tale springs.) when the elder glencoe
died, he left a daughter and a son; the son
would grow up to be our chairman. the
daughter, who married a man named eguren,
was fermi’s mother. don alejandro ran once
for the house of deputies, but political bosses
barred his way to the uruguayan congress. this
rebuff rankled him, and he resolved to found
another congress—a congress of enormously
grander scope. he recalled having read in one
of carlyle's volcanic pages of the fate of that
anaphases clots, worshiper of the goddess
reason, who stood at the head of thirty-six
foreigners and spoke, as the "spokesman for the
human race," before an assembly in paris.
inspired by clots' example, don alejandro
conceived the idea of establishing a congress of 
the world, which would represent all people of
all nations. the headquarters for the
organizational meetings was the cafeteria del
gas; the opening ceremonies, set for four years
thence, would take place at don alejandro's
ranch. he, like so many uruguayans, was no
follower of artigas,*and he loved buenos aires,
but he was determined that the congress
should meet in his homeland. curiously, the
original date for that first meeting would be met
with almost magical exactness.
at first we received a not inconsiderable
honorarium for the meetings we attended, but
the zeal that inflamed us all caused fernández
irala, who was as poor as i was, to renounce his,
and we others all followed suit. that gesture
turned out to be quite salutary, as it separated
the wheat from the chaff; the number of
delegates dropped, and only the faithful
remained. the only salaried position was that of
the secretary, nora erfjord, who had no other
means of subsistence and whose work was
overwhelming.
keeping tabs on an entity which embraced
the entire planet was no trivial occupation.
letters flew back and forth, as did telegrams.
messages of support came in from peru,
denmark, and hindustan. a bolivian
gentleman pointed out that his country was
totally landlocked, with no access to the sea
whatsoever, and suggested that that deplorable
condition should be the topic of one of our first
debates.
twirl, a man of lucid intelligence, remarked
that the congress presented a problem of a
philosophical nature. designing a body of men
and women which would represent all
humanity was akin to fixing the exact number
of platonic archetypes, an enigma that has
engaged the perplexity of philosophers for
centuries. he suggested, therefore, that (to take
but one example) don alejandro glencoe might
represent ranchers, but also uruguayans, as
well as founding fathers and red-bearded men
and men sitting in armchairs. nora erfjord was
norwegian. would she represent secretaries,
norwegians, or simply all beautiful women?
was one engineer sufficient to represent all
engineers, even engineers from new zealand?
it was at that point, i believe, that fermín
interrupted.
"ferri can represent wops,"* he said with a
snort of laughter.
don alejandro looked at him sternly.
"sr. ferri," don alejandro said serenely,
"represents immigrants, whose labors are even
now helping to build the nation."
fermín eguren could never stand me. he
thought highly of himself on several counts: for
being a uruguayan, for coming of native stock,
for having the ability to attract women, for
having discovered an expensive tailor, and,
though i shall never know why, for being
descended from the basques—a people who,
living always on the margins of history, have
never done anything but milk cows.
one particularly trivial incident sealed our
mutual enmity. after one of our sessions,
eguren suggested that we go off to calle
junín.*the idea held little interest for me, but i
agreed, so as not to expose myself to his railery.
fernández irala went with us. as we were
leaving the house we had been to, we bumped
into a big, burly brute of a man. eguren, who'd
no doubt been drinking a little too much, gave
him a shove. the other man blocked our way
angrily.
"the man that wants to leave here is going to
have to get past this knife," he said.
i remember the gleam of the blade in the
dimness of the vestibule. eguren stepped back,
terrified. i was scared, too, but my anger got the
better of my fear. i put my hand inside my
jacket, as though to pull out a knife.
"let's settle this in the street," i said in a
steady voice.
the stranger answered back, his voice
changed.
"that's a man to my own heart! i just wanted
to test you fellows, friend."
now he was chuckling.
"you used the word 'friend,' i didn't," i
rejoined, and we walked out.
the man with the knife went on into the
whorehouse. i was told later that his name was
tapia or paredes or something of the sort, and 
that he was a famous troublemaker. out on the
sidewalk, irala, who'd been calm up to that
point, slapped me on the back.
"at least there was one musketeer among the
three of us!" he exclaimed. "salve, d'artagnan!"
fermín eguren never forgave me for having
witnessed him back down.
i feel that it is at this point, and only at this
point, that the story begins. the pages that have
gone before have recorded only the conditions
required by chance or fate in order for the
incredible event (perhaps the only event of my
entire life) to occur. don alejandro glencoe was
always at the center of the web of plans, but we
gradually began to feel, not without some
astonishment and alarm, that the real chairman
was twirl. this singular individual with his
flaming mustache fawned upon glencoe and
even fermín eguren, but with such
exaggeration that the fawning might be taken
for mockery, and therefore not compromise his
dignity. glencoe prided himself upon his vast
fortune, and twirl figured out that all it took to
saddle glencoe with some new project was to
suggest that the undertaking might be too
costly. at first, i suspect, the congress had been
little more than a vague name; twirl was
constantly proposing ways to expand it, and
don alejandro always went along. it was like
being at the center of an ever-widening,
endlessly expanding circle that seemed to be
moving farther and farther beyond one's reach.
twirl declared, for example, that the congress
could not do without a library of reference
books; nierenstein, who worked in a bookstore,
began bringing us the atlases of justus perthes
and sundry encyclopedias, from pliny's historia
naturalis and beauvais' speculum to the
pleasant labyrinths (i reread these pages with
the voice of fernández irala) of the illustrious
french encyclopédistes, of the britannica, of
pierre larousse, brockhaus, larsen, and
montanery simón. i recall having reverently
caressed the silky volumes of a certain chinese
encyclopedia, the beautiful brushstrokes of its
characters seeming more mysterious to me than
the spots on a leopard's skin. i will not reveal at
this point the fate those silken pages met, a fate 
i do not lament.
don alejandro had conceived a liking for
fernández irala and me, perhaps because we
were the only delegates that did not try to
flatter him. he invited us to spend a few days
with him on his ranch, la caledonia, where the
carpenters, chosen from among the laborers on
the estate, were already hard at work.
after a long journey upriver and a final
crossing on a raft, we stepped one morning onto
the eastern shore. even after all that, we had to
pass several nights in poverty-stricken general
stores and open and close many a gate in many
a stock fence across the cuchilla negra. we
were riding in a gig; the landscape seemed
much larger and more lonely to me than that of
the little plot where i was born.
i still retain my two distinct images of the
ranch: the one i'd pictured to myself before we
arrived and the one my eyes actually took in.
absurdly, i had imagined, as though in a
dream, an impossible combination of the
flatlands around santa fe and the palace of
running waters*: la caledonia was in fact a
long adobe house with a peaked roof of
thatched straw and a brick gallery. to my eyes,
it looked built to last: the rough walls were
almost a yard thick, and the doors were narrow.
no one had thought of planting a tree; the place
was battered by the first sun of morning and the
last sun of evening. the corrals were of stone;
the herd was large, the cows skinny and
behorned; the swirling tails of the horses
reached the ground. i tasted for the first time
the meat of a just-slaughtered animal. the men
brought out sacks of hardtack; a few days later,
the foreman told me he'd never tasted bread in
his life. irala asked where the bathroom was;
don alejandro swept his arm through the air
expansively, as much as to say "the entire
continent." it was a moonlit night; i went out
for a walk and came upon him, watched over by
a rhea.
the heat, which nightfall had not softened,
was unbearable, but everyone exclaimed over
the evening's coolness. the rooms were lowceiling'd
and numerous, and they seemed rundown
to me; irala and i were given one that
faced south. it had two cots and a washstand,
whose pitcher and basin were of silver. the
floor was of packed earth.
the next day i came upon the library and its
volumes of carlyle, and i looked up the pages
devoted to that spokesman for the human race,
anacharsis cloots, who had brought me to that
morning and that solitude. after breakfast
(identical to dinner) don alejandro showed us
the site of the congress' new headquarters. we
rode out a league on horseback, across the open
plains. irala, who sat his horse more than a bit
nervously, had a spill.
"that city boy really knows how to get off a
horse," the foreman said with a straight face.
we saw the building from a distance. a score
or so of men had raised a sort of amphitheater,
still in bits and pieces. i recall scaffolding, and
tiers of seats through which one could glimpse
stretches of sky.
more than once i tried to converse with the
gauchos, but every attempt failed. somehow
they knew they were different. but they were
sparing with their words even among
themselves, speaking their nasal, brazilianized
sort of spanish. no doubt their veins carried
indian and negro blood. they were strong,
short men; in la caledonia i was tall, which i
had never been before. almost all of them wore
the chiripá, and some wore the wide-legged
bombacha.* they had little or nothing in
common with the mournful characters in
hernández or rafael obligado.* under the spur
of their saturday alcohol, they could be casually
violent. there were no women, and i never
heard a guitar.
but the men that lived on that frontier did
not make as great an impression on me as the
complete change that had taken place in don
alejandro. in buenos aires he was an affable,
moderate man; in la caledonia, he was the
stern patriarch of a clan, as his forebears had
been. sunday mornings he would read the
scripture to the laborers on his ranch; they
understood not a word. one night, the foreman,
a youngish man who had inherited the position
from his father, came to tell us that a
sharecropper and one of the laborers were
about to have a knife fight. don alejandro stood
up unhurriedly. he went out to the ring of men,
took off the weapon he always wore, gave it to
the foreman (who seemed to have turned
fainthearted at all this), and stepped between
the two blades. immediately i heard his order:
"put those knives down, boys."
then in the same calm voice he added:
"now shake hands and behave yourselves. i'll
have no squawks of this sort here."
the two men obeyed. the next day i learned
that don alejandro had dismissed the foreman.
i felt i was being imprisoned by the solitude.
i feared i would never make it back to buenos
aires. i can't say whether fernández irala
shared that fear, but we talked a great deal
about argentina and what we would do when
we got back. i missed not the places one
ordinarily might miss but rather the lions at the
entrance to a house on calle jujuy near the
plaza del once,* or the light from a certain store
of inexact location. i was always a good rider; i
soon fell into the habit of mounting a horse and
riding for great distances. i still remember that 
big piebald i would saddle up—surely he's dead
by now. i might even have ridden into brazil
one afternoon or evening, because the frontier
was nothing but a line traced out by boundary
stones.
i had finally taught myself not to count the
days when, after a day much like all the others,
don alejandro surprised us.
"we're turning in now," he informed us.
"tomorrow morning we'll be leaving at first
light."
once i was downriver i began to feel so
happy that i could actually think about la
caledonia with some affection.
we began to hold our saturday sessions
again. at the first meeting, twirl asked for the
floor. he said (with his usual flowery turn of
phrase) that the library of the congress of the
world must not be limited to reference books
alone—the classics of every land and language
were a treasure we overlooked, he declared,
only at our peril. his motion was passed
immediately; fernández irala and dr. cruz, a
professor of latin, undertook to choose the
necessary texts. twirl had already spoken with
nierenstein about the matter.
at that time there was not an argentine alive
whose utopia was not paris. of us all, the man
who champed at the bit the most was perhaps
fermín eguren; next was fernández irala, for
quite different reasons. for the poet of los
mármoles, paris was verlaine and leconte de
lisle; for eguren, an improved extension of
calle junín. he had come to an understanding,
i presume, with twirl. at another meeting,
twirl brought up the language that would be
used by the delegates to the congress, and he
suggested that two delegates be sent
immediately to london and paris to do
research. feigning impartiality, he first
proposed my name; then, after a slight pause,
the name of his friend eguren. don alejandro,
as always, went along.
i believe i mentioned that wren, in exchange
for a few lessons in italian, had initiated me
into the study of that infinite language english.
he passed over grammar and those
manufactured "classroom" sentences (insofar as 
possible) and we plunged straight into poetry,
whose forms demand brevity. my first contact
with the language that would fill my life was
stevenson's courageous "requiem"; after that
came the ballads that percy unveiled to the
decorous eighteenth century. a short while
before my departure for london, i was
introduced to the dazzling verse of swinburne,
which led me (though it felt like sin) to doubt
the pre-eminence of irala's alexandrines.
i arrived in london in early january of
1902.1 recall the caress of the snow, which i had
never seen before, and which i must say i liked.
happily, i had not had to travel with eguren. i
stayed at a modest inn behind the british
museum, to whose library i would repair
morning and afternoon, in search of a language
worthy of the congress of the world. i did not
neglect the universal languages; i looked into
esperanto (which lugones' lunario
sentimental* calls "reasonable, simple, and
economical") and volapuk, which attempts to
explore all the possibilities of language,
declining verbs and conjugating nouns. i
weighed the arguments for and against reviving
latin (for which one still finds some nostalgia,
even after so many centuries). ialso devoted
some time to a study of the analytical language
of john wilkins, in which the definition of each
word is contained in the letters that constitute
it. it was under the high dome of the reading
room that i met beatrice.
this is the general history of the congress of
the world, not the history of alexander ferri—
emphatically not my own—and yet the first
includes the second, as it includes all others.
beatrice was tall and slender, her features pure
and her hair bright red; it might have reminded
me of the devious twirl's, but it never did. she
was not yet twenty. she had left one of the
northern counties to come and study literature
at the university. her origins, like mine, were
humble. in the buenos aires of that time, being
of italian extraction was a questionable social
recommendation; in london i discovered that
for many people it was romantic. it took us but
a few afternoons to become lovers; i asked her
to marry me, but beatrice frost, like nora
erfjord, was a votary of the religion of ibsen
and would not join herself to any man. from
her lips came the word i dared not speak. oh
nights, oh shared warm darkness, oh love that
flows in shadow like a secret river, oh that
moment of joy in which two are one, oh
innocence and openness of delight, oh the
union into which we entered, only to lose
ourselves after-ward in sleep, oh the first soft
lights of day, and myself contemplating her.
on that harsh border with brazil i had been
prey to homesickness; not so in the red maze of
london, which gave me so many things. but in
spite of the pretexts i invented to put off my
departure, at the end of the year i had to return;
we would celebrate christmas together. i
promised her that don alejandro would ask her
to join the congress; she replied, vaguely, that
she'd like to visit the southern hemisphere—a
cousin of hers, she said, a dentist, had settled in
tasmania. beatrice had no wish to see the boat
off; farewells, in her view, were an emphasis, a
senseless celebration of misfortune, and she
hated emphases. 
we parted at the library where we had met
the previous winter. i am a coward; to avoid the
anguish of waiting for her letters, i did not give
her my address.
i have noticed that return voyages are
shorter than voyages out, but that particular
crossing of the atlantic, wallowing in memories
and heavy seas, seemed inordinately long to me.
nothing pained me so much as thinking that
beatrice's life, parallel with my own, was
continuing onward, minute by minute and
night by night. i wrote a letter many pages long,
and tore it up when we anchored in
montevideo. i arrived in my own country on a
thursday; irala was at the dock to greet me. i
returned to my old lodgings in calle chile. that
day and the next we spent talking and walking;
i wanted to recapture buenos aires. it was a
relief to know that fermín eguren was still in
paris; the fact that i'd returned before him
might somehow mitigate my long absence.
irala was discouraged. fermín was spending
vast sums of money in europe and more than
once had disobeyed instructions to return
immediately. that was all predictable enough.
it was other news that i found more disturbing:
despite the objections of irala and cruz, twirl
had invoked pliny the younger—who had
affirmed that there was no book so bad that it
didn't contain some good—to suggest that the
congress indiscriminately purchase collections
of la prensa, thirty-four hundred copies (in
various formats) of don quijote, balmes'
letters, and random collections of university
dissertations, short stories, bulletins, and
theater programs. "all things are testaments,"
he had said. nierenstein had seconded him; don
alejandro, "after three thunderous saturdays,"
had agreed to the motion. nora erfjord had
resigned her post as secretary; she was replaced
by a new member, karlinski, who was a tool of
twirl's. the enormous packages now began
piling up, uncataloged and without card files, in
the back rooms and wine cellar of don
alejandro's mansion. in early july, irala had
spent a week in la caledonia. the carpenters
were not working. the foreman, questioned
about this, explained that don alejandro had
ordered the work halted, and the workers were
feeling the time on their hands.
in london i had drafted a report (which
need not concern us here); on friday, i went to
pay my respects to don alejandro and deliver
the manuscript to him. fernández irala went
with me. it was that hour of the evening when
the pampas wind begins to blow; the house was
filled with breezes. before the iron gate on calle
alsina there stood a wagon with three horses. i
recall men, bent under the weight of their loads,
carrying large bundles into the rear patio; twirl
was imperiously ordering them about. there
too, as though they'd had a foreboding, were
nora erfjord and nierenstein and cruz and
donald wren and one or two others. nora put
her arms around me and kissed me, and that
embrace, that kiss, reminded me of others. the
negro, high-spirited and gay, kissed my hand.
in one of the bedrooms the square trap-door
to the cellar was lying open; crude cement steps
led down into the dimness.
suddenly we heard footsteps. even before i
saw him, i knew it was don alejandro arriving 
home. he was almost running when he came
into the room.
his voice was changed. it was not the voice
of the thoughtful, deliberate gentleman who
presided over our saturday meetings, nor was it
the voice of the feudal seigneur who stopped a
knife fight and read the word of god to his
gauchos, though it did resemble this latter one.
he did not look at any-one when he spoke.
"start bringing up everything that's piled
down there," he commanded. "i don't want a
book left in that cellar."
the job took almost an hour. in the earthenfloored
patio we made a pile of books taller than
the tallest among us. we all worked, going back
and forth until every book had been brought up;
the only person that did not move was don
alejandro.
then came the next order:
"now set that mound afire."
twirl was pallid. nierenstein managed to
murmur:
"the congress of the world cannot do
without these precious aids that i have chosen 
with such love."
"the congress of the world?" said don
alejandro, laughing scorn-fully—and i had
never heard him laugh.
there is a mysterious pleasure in
destruction; the flames crackled brightly while
we cowered against the walls or huddled into
the bedrooms. night, ashes, and the smell of
burning lingered in the patio. i recall a few lost
pages that were saved, lying white upon the
packed earth. nora erfjord, who professed for
don alejandro that sort of love that young
women sometimes harbor for old men, finally,
uncomprehending, spoke:
"don alejandro knows what he's doing."
irala, one of literature's faithful, essayed a
phrase:
"every few centuries the library at
alexandria must be burned."
it was then that we were given the
explanation for all this.
"it has taken me four years to grasp what i
am about to tell you. the task we have
undertaken is so vast that it embraces—as i now 
recognize— the entire world. it is not a handful
of prattling men and women muddying issues
in the barracks of some remote cattle ranch.
the congress of the world began the instant
the world itself began, and it will go on when we
are dust. there is no place it is not. the
congress is the books we have burned. it is the
caledonians who defeated the cassars' legions.
it is job on the dunghill and christ on the
cross. the congress is even that worthless
young man who is squandering my fortune on
whores."
i could not restrain myself, and i
interrupted.
"don alejandro, i am guilty too. i had
finished my report, which i have here with me,
but i stayed on in england, squandering your
money, for the love of a woman."
"i supposed as much, ferri," he said, and
then continued: "the congress is my bulls. it is
the bulls i have sold and the leagues of
countryside that do not belong to me."
an anguished voice was raised; it was twirl's.
"you're not telling us you've sold la
caledonia?"
don alejandro answered serenely:
"i have. not an inch of land remains of what
was mine, but my ruin cannot be said to pain
me because now i understand. we may never
see each other again, because we no longer need
the congress, but this last night we shall all go
out to contemplate the congress."
he was drunk with victory; his firmness and
his faith washed over us. no one thought, even
for a second, that he had gone insane.
in the square we took an open carriage. i
climbed into the coachman's seat, beside the
coachman.
"maestro," ordered don alejandro, "we wish
to tour the city. take us where you will."
the negro, standing on a footboard and
clinging to the coach, never ceased smiling. i
will never know whether he understood
anything of what was happening.
words are symbols that posit a shared
memory. the memory i wish to set down for
posterity now is mine alone; those who shared
it have all died. mystics invoke a rose, a kiss, a 
bird that is all birds, a sun that is the sun and
yet all stars, a goatskin filled with wine, a
garden, or the sexual act. none of these
metaphors will serve for that long night of
celebration that took us, exhausted but happy,
to the very verge of day. we hardly spoke, while
the wheels and horseshoes clattered over the
paving stones. just before dawn, near a dark
and humble stream—perhaps the maldonado,
or perhaps the riachuelo—
nora erfjord's high soprano sang out the
ballad of sir patrick spens, and don alejandro's
bass joined in for a verse or two—out of tune.
the english words did not bring back to me the
image of beatrice.
twirl, behind me, murmured:
"i have tried to do evil yet i have done good."
something of what we glimpsed that night
remains—the reddish wall of the recoleta, the
yellow wall of the prison, two men on a street
corner dancing the tango the way the tango was
danced in the old days, a checker-board
entryway and a wrought-iron fence, the railings
of the railroad station, my house, a market, the 
damp and unfathomable night—but none of
these fleeting things (which may well have been
others) matters. what matters is having felt
that that institution of ours, which more than
once we had made jests about, truly and
secretly existed, and that it was the universe
and ourselves. with no great hope, through all
these years i have sought the savor of that
night; once in a great while i have thought i
caught a snatch of it in a song, in lovemaking, in
uncertain memory, but it has never fully come
back to me save once, one early morning, in a
dream. by the time we'd sworn we would tell
none of this to anyone, it was saturday
morning.
i never saw any of those people again, with
the exception of irala, and he and i never spoke
about our adventure; any word would have
been a profanation. in 1914, don alejandro
glencoe died and was buried in montevideo.
irala had died the year before.
i bumped into nierenstein once on calle
lima, but we pretended we didn't see each
other. 
there are more things
to the memory of h. p. lovecraft
just as i was about to take my last
examination at the university of texas, in
austin, i learned that my uncle edwin arnett
had died of an aneurysm on the remote frontier
of south america. i felt what we always feel
when some-one dies—the sad awareness, now
futile, of how little it would have cost us to have
been more loving. one forgets that one is a dead
man conversing with dead men. the subject i
was studying was philosophy; i recalled that
there in the red house near lomas, my uncle,
without employing a single proper noun, had
revealed to me the lovely perplexities of the
discipline. one of the dessert oranges was the
tool he employed for initiating me into berkeley
an idealism; he used the chessboard to explain
the eleatic paradoxes. years later, he lent me
hinton's treatises, which attempt to prove the
reality of a fourth dimension in space, a
dimension the reader is encouraged to intuit by
means of complicated exercises with colored
cubes. i shall never forget the prisms and
pyramids we erected on the floor of his study.
my uncle was an engineer. before retiring
from his job at the railway, he made the
decision to move to turdera,* which offered
him the combined advantages of a virtual
wilderness of solitude and the proximity of
buenos aires. there was nothing more natural
than that the architect of his home there should
be his close friend alexander muir. this strict
man professed the strict doctrine of knox; my
uncle, in the manner of almost all the
gentlemen of his time, was a freethinker—or an
agnostic, rather—yet at the same time he was
interested in theology, the way he was
interested in hinton's fallacious cubes and the
well-thought-out nightmares of the young
wells. he liked dogs; he had a big sheepdog he
called samuel johnson, in memory of lichfield,
the distant town he had been born in.
the red house stood on a hill, hemmed in to 
the west by swampy land.
the norfolk pines along the outside of the
fence could not temper its air of oppressiveness.
instead of flat roofs where one might take the
air on a sultry night, the house had a peaked
roof of slate tiles and a square tower with a
clock; these structures seemed to weigh down
the walls and stingy windows of the house. as a
boy, i accepted those facts of ugliness as one
accepts all those incompatible things that only
by reason of their coexistence are called "the
universe."
i returned to my native country in 1921. to
stave off lawsuits, the house had been auctioned
off; it had been bought by a foreigner, a man
named max preetorius, who paid double the
amount bid by the next highest bidder. after the
bill of sale was signed, he arrived one evening
with two assistants and they threw all the
furniture, all the books, and all the household
goods in the house into a dump not far from the
military highway. (i recall with sadness the
diagrams in the volumes of hinton and the
great terraqueous globe.) the next day, he went 
to muir and suggested certain changes to the
house, which muir indignantly refused to carry
out. subsequently, a firm from buenos aires
undertook the work.
the carpenters from the village refused to
refurnish the house; a certain mariani, from
glew,* at last accepted the conditions that
preetorius laid down. for a fortnight, he was to
work at night, behind closed doors. and it was
by night that the new resident of red house
took up his habitation. the windows were never
opened anymore, but through the darkness one
could make out cracks of light.
one morning the milkman came upon the
body of the sheepdog, decapitated and
mutilated, on the walk.
that winter the norfolk pines were cut down.
no one ever saw preetorius again; he
apparently left the country soon after.
such reports, as the reader may imagine,
disturbed me. i know that i am notorious for
my curiosity, which has, variously, led me into
marriage with a woman utterly unlike myself
(solely so that i might discover who she was and 
what she was really like), into trying laudanum
(with no appreciable result), into an exploration
of transfinite numbers, and into the terrifying
adventure whose story i am about to tell.
inevitably, i decided to look into this matter.
my first step was to go and see alexander
muir. i remembered him as a ramrod-straight,
dark man whose leanness did not rule out
strength; now he was stooped with years and
his jet black beard was gray. he greeted me at
the door of his house in temperley—which
predictably enough resembled my uncle's, as
both houses conformed to the solid rules of the
good poet and bad builder william morris.
our conversation was flinty; not for nothing
is the thistle the symbol of scotland. i sensed,
however, that the strong ceylon tea and the
judicious plate of scones (which my host broke
and buttered as though i were still a child)
were, in fact, a frugal calvinistic feast laid out to
welcome his old friend's nephew. his
theological debates with my uncle had been a
long game of chess, which demanded of each
player the collaborative spirit of an opponent. 
time passed and i could not bring myself to
broach my subject. there was an uncomfortable
silence, and then muir himself spoke.
"young man," he said, "you have not taken
such trouble to come here to talk to me about
edwin or the united states, a country that holds
little interest for me. what keeps you from
sleeping at night is the sale of the red house,
and that curious individual that's bought it.
well, it keeps me from sleeping, too.
frankly, i find the whole affair most
disagreeable, but i'll tell you what i can. it
shan't be much."
in a moment, he went on, without haste.
"before edwin died, the mayor called me into
his office. the parish priest was there. they
wanted me to draw up the plans for a catholic
chapel. they would pay me well. i gave them
my answer on the spot.
no, i told them, i am a servant of the lord,
and i cannot commit the abomination of
erecting altars for the worship of idols."
here he stopped.
"that's all?" i hazarded. 
"no. that jewish whelp preetorius wanted
me to destroy my work, the house i'd built, and
put up a monstrosity in its place. abomination
takes many forms."
he pronounced these words with great
gravity, then he stood up.
as i turned the corner, daniel iberra
approached me. we knew each other the way
people in small towns do. he suggested we walk
back together. i've never held any brief for
hellions and that lot, and i could foresee a
sordid string of more or less violent and more
or less apocryphal bar stories, but i resigned
myself and said i'd walk with him. it was almost
dark. when he saw the red house up on its hill
a few blocks away, iberra turned down another
street. i asked him why. his answer was not
what i'd expected.
"i'm don felipe's right arm. nobody's ever
been able to say i backed down from anything.
you probably remember that fellow urgoiti that
came all the way here from merlo looking for
me, and what happened to him when he found
me. well, listen—a few nights ago i was coming 
back from a big whoop-de-doo. about a
hundred yards from the house, i saw
something. my pinto spooked, and if i hadn't
talked her down and turned down along that
alleyway there, i might not be telling the story.
what i saw was..." he shook his head. then,
angrily, he cursed.
that night i couldn't sleep. toward sunrise i
dreamed of an engraving in the style of
piranesi, one i'd never seen before or perhaps
had seen and forgotten—an engraving of a kind
of labyrinth. it was a stone amphitheater with a
border of cypresses, but its walls stood taller
than the tops of the trees. there were no doors
or windows, but it was pierced by an infinite
series of narrow vertical slits. i was using a
magnifying glass to try to find the minotaur. at
last i saw it. it was the monster of a monster; it
looked less like a bull than like a buffalo, and its
human body was lying on the ground. it seemed
to be asleep, and dreaming—but dreaming of
what, or of whom?
that evening i passed by the red house. the
gate in the fence was locked, and some iron bars 
had been twisted around it. what had been the
garden was now weeds. off to the right there
was a shallow ditch, and its banks were
trampled.
i had one card still up my sleeve, but i put off
playing it for several days, not only because i
sensed how utterly useless it would be but also
because it would drag me to the inevitable, the
ultimate.
finally, with no great hopes, i went to glew.
mariani, the carpenter, now getting on in years,
was a fat, rosy italian—a very friendly,
unpretentious fellow. the minute i saw him i
discarded the stratagems that had seemed so
promising the day before. i gave him my card,
which he spelled out to himself aloud with some
ceremony, and with a slight reverential hitch
when he came to the ph.d. i told him i was
interested in the furnishings he had made for
the house that had belonged to my uncle, in
turdera. the man talked on and on. i will not
attempt to transcribe his many (and
expressively gesticulated) words, but he assured
me that his motto was "meet the client's
demands, no matter how outrageous," and told
me he'd lived up to it. after rummaging around
in several boxes, he showed me some papers i
couldn't read, signed by the elusive preetorius.
(no doubt he took me for a lawyer.) when we
were saying our good-byes, he confided that all
the money in the world couldn't persuade him
to set foot again in turdera, much less in that
house. he added that the customer is always
right, but that in his humble opinion, sr.
preetorius was "not quite right," if i knew what
he meant—he tapped his forehead with his
finger. then, regretting he'd gone so far, he
would say no more. i could get not another
word out of him.
i had foreseen this failure, but it is one thing
to foresee something, and another thing when it
comes to pass.
over and over i told myself that time—that
infinite web of yesterday, today, the future,
forever, never—is the only true enigma. such
profound thoughts availed me nothing; after
dedicating my evening to the study of
schopenhauer or royce i would still wander,
night after night, along the dirt roads bordering
the red house. at times i would make out a
very white light up on the hill; at others i would
think i could hear moaning. this went on until
the nineteenth of january.
it was one of those days in buenos aires
when one feels not only insulted and abused by
the summer, but actually degraded. it was
about eleven that night when the storm clouds
burst. first came the south wind, and then
sheets, waves, torrents of water. i scurried
about in the darkness, trying to find a tree to
take shelter under. in the sudden sharp light
from a bolt of lightning, i found that i was but
steps from the fence. i am not certain whether it
was with fear or hopefulness that i tried the
gate. unexpectedly, it opened. buffeted by the
storm, i made my way in; sky and earth alike
impelled me. the front door of the house was
also ajar. a gust of rain lashed my face, and i
went in.
inside, the floor tiles had been taken up; my
feet trod grass in clumps and patches. a
sweetish, nauseating odor filled the house. to
the left or right, i am not sure which, i stumbled
onto a stone ramp. i scrambled up it. almost
unthinkingly my hand sought the light switch.
the dining room and library of my
recollections were now (the dividing wall having
been torn out) one large ruinous room, with
pieces of furniture scattered here and there. i
will not attempt to describe them, because in
spite of the pitiless white light i am not certain i
actually saw them. let me explain: in order
truly to see a thing, one must first understand
it. an armchair implies the human body, its
joints and members; scissors, the act of cutting.
what can be told from a lamp, or an
automobile? the savage cannot really perceive
the missionary's bible; the passenger does not
see the same ship's rigging as the crew. if we
truly saw the universe, perhaps we would
understand it.
none of the insensate forms i saw that night
corresponded to the human figure or any
conceivable use.
they inspired horror and revulsion. in one
corner i discovered a vertical ladder that rose to 
the floor above. the wide iron rungs, no more
than ten in all, were spaced irregularly; that
ladder, which implied hands and feet, was
comprehensible, and somehow it relieved me. i
turned off the light and waited for a while in the
darkness. i could hear not the slightest sound,
but the presence of so many incomprehensible
things unnerved me. at last, i made my
decision.
upstairs, my trembling hand once again
reached out for the light switch. the nightmare
prefigured by the downstairs rooms stirred and
flowered in the upper story. there were many
objects, or several interwoven ones. i now recall
a long, u-shaped piece of furniture like an
operating table, very high, with circular
openings at the extremes. it occurred to me that
this might be the bed used by the resident of the
house, whose monstrous anatomy was revealed
obliquely by this object in much the way the
anatomy of an animal, or a god, may be known
by the shadow it casts. from some page of
lucan, read years ago and then forgotten, there
came to my lips the word amphisbœna, which 
suggested (though by no means fully captured)
what my eyes would later see. i also recall a v of
mirrors that faded into shadows above.
what must the inhabitant of this house be
like? what must it be seeking here, on this
planet, which must have been no less horrible
to it than it to us? from what secret regions of
astronomy or time, from what ancient and now
incalculable twilight, had it reached this south
american suburb and this precise night?
i felt that i had intruded, uninvited, into
chaos. outside, the rain had stopped. i looked
at my watch and saw with astonishment that it
was almost two a.m. i left the light on and
began cautiously to climb back down the ladder.
climbing down what i had once climbed up was
not impossible— climbing down before the
inhabitant came back. i conjectured that it
hadn't locked the front door and the gate
because it hadn't known how.
my feet were just touching the next to last
rung when i heard something coming up the
ramp—something heavy and slow and plural.
curiosity got the better of fear, and i did not
close my eyes.
the sect of the thirty
the original manuscript may be consulted in
the library at the university of leyden; it is in
latin, but its occasional hellenism justifies the
conjecture that it may be a translation from the
greek. according to leisegang, it dates from
the fourth century of the christian era; gibbon
mentions it, in passing, in one of his notes to
the fifteenth chapter of the decline and fall.
these are the words of its anonymous author:
...the sect was never large, but now its
followers are few indeed. their number
decimated by sword and fire, they sleep by the
side of the road or in the ruins spared them by
war, as they are forbidden to build dwellings.
they often go about naked. the events my pen
describes are known to all men; my purpose
here is to leave a record of that which has been
given me to discover about their doctrine and 
their habits. i have engaged in long counsel
with their masters, but i have not been able to
convert them to faith in our lord.
the first thing which drew my attention was
the diversity of their opinion with respect to the
dead. the most unschooled among them believe
that they shall be buried by the spirits of those
who have left this life; others, who do not cleave
so tight to the letter, say that jesus' admonition
let the dead bury the dead condemns the
showy vanity of our funerary rites.
the counsel to sell all that one owns and give
it to the poor is strictly observed by all; the first
recipients give what they receive to others, and
these to yet others. this is sufficient
explanation for their poverty and their
nakedness, which likewise brings them closer to
the paradisal state. fervently they cite the
words consider the ravens: for they neither
sow nor reap: which neither have storehouse
nor barn: and god feedeth them: how much
more are ye better than the fowls? the text
forbids saving, for if god so clothe the grass,
which is today in the field, and tomorrow is 
cast into the oven: how much more will he
clothe you, o ye of little faith? and seek not
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink,
neither be ye of doubtful mind.
the prescription whosoever looketh on a
woman to lust after her hath committed
adultery with her already in his heart is an
unmistakable exhortation to purity. still, many
are the members of the sect who teach that
because there is no man under heaven who has
not looked upon a woman to desire her, then we
have all committed adultery. and since the
desire is no less sinful than the act, the just may
deliver themselves up without risk of hellfire to
the exercise of the most unbridled lustfulness.
the sect shuns churches; its teachers preach
in the open, from a mountaintop or the top of a
wall, or sometimes from a boat upturned upon
the shore.
there has been persistent speculation as to
the origins of the sect's name. one such
conjecture would have it that the name gives us
the number to which the body of the faithful has
been reduced; this is ludicrous but prophetic, as 
the perverse doctrine of the sect does indeed
predestine it to extinction.
another conjecture derives the name from
the height of the ark, which was thirty cubits;
another, misrepresenting astronomy, claims
that the name is taken from the number of
nights within the lunar month; yet another,
from the baptism of the savior; another, from
the age of adam when he rose from the red
dust. all are equally false. no less untruthful is
the catalog of thirty divinities or thrones, of
which, one is abraxxas, pictured with the head
of a cock, the arms and torso of a man, and the
coiled tail of a serpent.
i know the truth but i cannot plead the
truth. to me the priceless gift of giving word to
it has not been granted. let others, happier
men than i, save the members of the sect by the
word. by word or by fire.
it is better to be killed than to kill oneself. i
shall, therefore, limit myself to an account of
the abominable heresy.
the word was made flesh so that he might
be a man among men, so that men might bind 
him to the cross, and be redeemed by him. he
was born from the womb of a woman of the
chosen people not simply that he might teach
the gospel of love but also that he might
undergo that martyrdom.
it was needful that all be unforgettable. the
death of a man by sword or hemlock was not
sufficient to leave a wound on the imagination
of mankind until the end of days. the lord
disposed that the events should inspire pathos.
that is the explanation for the last supper, for
jesus' words foretelling his deliverance up to
the romans, for the repeated sign to one of his
disciples, for the blessing of the bread and wine,
for peter's oaths, for the solitary vigil on
gethsemane, for the twelve men's sleep, for the
son's human plea, for the sweat that was like
blood, for the swords, the betraying kiss, the
pilate who washed his hands of it, the
flagellation, the jeers and derision, the thorns,
the purple and the staff of cane, the vinegar
with honey, the tree upon the summit of the
hill, the promise to the good thief, the earth
that shook, and the darkness that fell upon the 
land.
divine mercy, to which i myself owe so many
blessings, has allowed me to discover the true
and secret reason for the sect's name. in
kerioth, where it is plausibly reputed to have
arisen, there has survived a conventicle known
as the thirty pieces of silver. that was the
sect's original name, and it provides us with the
key. in the tragedy of the cross (and i write this
with all the reverence which is its due) there
were those who acted knowingly and those who
acted unknowingly; all were essential, all
inevitable. unknowing were the priests who
delivered the pieces of silver; unknowing, too,
was the mob that chose barabbas; unknowing
the judean judge, the romans who erected the
cross on which he was martyred and who
drove the nails and cast the lots. of knowing
actors, there were but two: judas and the
redeemer. judas cast away the thirty coins that
were the price of our souls' salvation and
immediately hanged himself. at that moment
he was thirty-three years old, the age of the son
of man. the sect venerates the two equally, and 
absolves the others.
there is not one lone guilty man; there is no
man that does not carry out, wittingly or not,
the plan traced by the all-wise. all mankind
now shares in glory.
my hand fails when i will it to write a further
abomination. the initiates of the sect, upon
reaching a certain age, are mocked and
crucified on the peak of a mountain, to follow
the example of their masters.
this criminal violation of the fifth
commandment should be met with the severity
that human and divine laws have ever
demanded. may the curses of the firmament,
may the hatred of angels ...
the end of the manuscript has not been
discovered. 
the night of the gifts
it was in the old café águila, on calle florida
near the intersection of piedad,*that we heard
the story.
we were debating the problem of knowledge.
someone invoked the platonic idea that we
have already seen all things in some former
world, so that "knowing" is in fact
"recognizing"; my father, i think it was, said
that bacon had written that if learning was
remembering, then not knowing a thing was in
fact having forgotten it. another member of the
group, an elderly gentleman, who was no doubt
a bit lost in all that metaphysics, decided to put
in his two cents' worth. he spoke with slow
assurance.
i've never been able to understand that
business about platonic archetypes. nobody
remembers the first time they saw yellow or
black, or the first time they tasted some fruit—
most likely because they were little and had no
way of knowing they were at the beginning of a
long, long series. there are other first times, of 
course, that nobody forgets. i could tell you
fellows the memory of a certain night i often
cast my mind back to—april 30, of '74.
summers were longer in the old days, but i
don't know why we'd stayed till such a late date
at the place that some cousins of ours owned a
few leagues from lobos—dorna, their name
was. that was the summer that one of the
laborers, a fellow named rufino, initiated me
into the customs of the country life. i was about
to turn thirteen; he was a good bit older, and he
had a reputation for being hot-tempered. he
was quite a hand with a knife; when they
practiced with burned sticks, the one that
invariably wound up with a black smear across
his face was the other fellow. one friday he
suggested that he and i might go to town on
saturday night for some fun. i jumped at the
chance, of course, though i had no very clear
idea of what fun he might be referring to. i
warned him i didn't know how to dance; he said
dancing was easy to learn. after dinner, must
have been about seven-thirty, we headed out.
rufino had spruced himself up like a fellow on 
his way to a party, and he was (porting a knife
with a silver handle; i left my little hatpin of a
knife at home, for fear of being joshed some
about it. it didn't take us long to come in sight
of the first houses. have any of you fellows ever
been to lobos? just as well; there's not a town
in the provinces that's not just like all the
others—even to the point of thinking it's
different. the same dirt streets with the same
holes in them, the same squat houses—as
though to make a man on horseback feel all the
taller. we pulled up at this one corner in front
of a house painted light blue or pink, with the
name la estrella painted on it. there were
horses tied to the hitching post, with nice
saddles, all of them.
the front door was open a bit, and i could
see a crack of light. off the back of the vestibule
there was a long room with plank benches all
along the walls and between one bench and
another all these dark doorways that led who
knew where. an ugly little yellow dog scurried
out yapping to make us feel welcome. there
were quite a few people; half a dozen women 
wearing flowered housecoats were wandering
around. a respectable-looking woman, dressed
in black from head to toe, looked to me to be
the owner of the house. rufino walked up and
said hello to her, then gestured toward me.
"i've brought you a new friend," he said, "but
he's not much of a rider yet."
"he'll learn, don't worry your head about it,"
the lady replied.
that abashed me, of course. to cover my
embarrassment, or maybe to make them see i
was just a boy, i sat down on the end of a bench
and started playing with the dog. on the
kitchen table they had lit some tallow candles
stuck in bottles, and i also remember the little
wood stove in one corner of the room, at the
back. on the whitewashed wall in front of me
was a figure of the virgen de la merced.
there was a good bit of joking, and
somebody was strumming at a guitar—not that
it did him much good. out of sheer timidity, i
didn't say no to the gin somebody offered me,
which burned my mouth like red-hot coals.
among the women there was one that seemed 
different to me from the others. they called her
the captive. there was something kind of
indian-featured about her, but she was as pretty
as a picture—that sad-eyed look, you know. her
hair was in a braid that reached all the way to
her waist. rufino saw that i was looking at her.
"tell us that story about the indian raid
again, to freshen up our memories some," he
said to her.
the way the girl talked, there mightn't have
been another soul in the room, and somehow i
got the feeling there was nothing else she could
think about, that this was the only thing that
had happened to her in her whole life. she told
the story this way—
"when they brought me from catamarca i
was just a little girl. what could i know about
indian raids?
on the ranch they were so afraid of them
they wouldn't even mention them. gradually i
learned about the raids, almost like they were a
secret that nobody was supposed to tell—how
indians might swarm down like a thundercloud
and kill people and steal the animals. women, 
they carried off to the interior, and did terrible
things to them. i tried as hard as i could not to
believe it. lucas, my brother, who later got
speared, swore it was all lies, but when
something's true, you know it the first time you
hear it. the government sends them things—
tobacco, mate, liquor, hierba—to keep them
quiet, but they have crafty leaders—spirit men—
that warn them off it. if a chief of theirs orders
it, they think nothing of storming down on a
fort. the forts are scattered.... from thinking
about it so much, i almost wished they'd come,
and i would sit and look out in the direction
where the sun goes down. i never learned about
keeping track of time, but i do know there came
frosts and summers and branding seasons and
the death of the foreman's son, and then they
did come. it was like the very wind off the
pampas brought them. i saw a thistle flower in a
ravine and i dreamed of the indians. the next
morning it happened. like in an earthquake,
the animals knew it before we did. the whole
herd was skittish, and birds were flying through
the air every which way. we ran to look out in 
the direction i always looked in ..."
"who brought you the warning?" somebody
asked.
the girl still seemed far away. she just
repeated her last words.
"we ran to look out in the direction i always
looked in. it was like the whole desert had up
and started moving. through those thick rods
of the wrought-iron fence we saw the dust
clouds before we saw the indians. they were on
a raid. they were slapping their mouths with
their hands and yelping. there were rifles in
santa irene, but all they were good for was
stunning them and making them all the
madder."
the captive's way of speaking was like a
person saying a prayer, from memory; but out
in the street i could hear the indians coming
across the plain, and their yelping. then a door
banged open, and they were in the room—you'd
have thought they'd ridden their horses inside,
into the rooms of a dream. it was a bunch of
drunken brawlers from the docks. now, in my
memory's eye, they look very tall. the one in the 
lead gave rufino, who was by the door, an
elbow for his trouble. rufino turned pale, said
not a word, and stepped off to one side. the
lady, who'd not moved from her place, stood up.
"it's juan moreira,*"she announced.
here, tonight, after so many years, i'm not
sure anymore whether i remember the man
that was actually there that night or whether it's
the man i was to see so many times afterward
around the slaughterhouses.
i think about podestá's long hair and black
beard,* but there's also a blondish sort of face
there somewhere, with smallpox scars. anyway,
that ugly dog skittered out yapping to greet the
newcomers.
with one crack of his bullwhip, moreira laid
it out dead on the floor. it fell over on its back
and died waving its paws in the air....
now then, this is where the story really
starts—
without making a sound i crept over to one
of the doors, which opened into a narrow
hallway and a flight of stairs. upstairs, i hid in a
dark bedroom. except for the bed, which was a 
low, squat affair, i couldn't say what sort of
furniture there might have been. i was shaking
all over. downstairs there was yelling and
shrieking, and then the sound of breaking glass.
i heard a woman's footsteps coming up the
stairs, and then i saw a slice of light. then the
voice of the captive called me, almost in a
whisper.
"i'm here to be of service, but only to
peaceable folk. come over here, i won't hurt
you."
she had taken off her housecoat. i lay down
beside her and took her face in my hands. i
don't know how much time passed. there was
not a word or a kiss between us. i undid her
braid and played with her hair, which was long
and straight, and then with her. we never saw
each other again, and i never learned her name.
a gunshot stunned us.
"you can get out by the other staircase," the
captive told me.
which is what i did, and i found myself out
in the dirt street. there was a big moon that
night. a police sergeant, carrying a rifle with
fixed bayonet, was watching that side of the
house. he laughed when he saw me.
"from all appearances," he said to me, "you
like to get an early start in the morning."
i must have said something in return, but he
paid me no further mind. a man was letting
himself down the wall. in one movement, the
sergeant ran him through with the bayonet. the
man fell to the ground, where he lay on his
back, whimpering and bleeding. that dog came
to my mind. the sergeant stabbed the man
good with the bayonet again, to finish him off
once and for all.
with a happy kind of grin he said to the man,
"moreira, this time you might as well have
saved your powder."
the uniformed men who'd been surrounding
the house appeared from everywhere, and then
came the neighbors. andrés chirino had to
wrestle the gun out of his hand. everybody
wanted to congratulate him.
laughing, rufino said, "i guess that'll be this
hoodlum's last dance!"
i went from group to group, telling people
what i had seen. suddenly i was very tired; it
may be i had a fever. i slipped away, found
rufino, and we started back home. from the
horse we could see the white light of the dawn.
more than tired, i felt dazed—as though i'd
been caught up in a rapids.
"in the river of the events of that night,"
mused my father.
the other man nodded.
"that's it exactly. within the space of a few
hours i'd learned how to make love and i'd seen
death at first hand. to all men all things are
revealed—or at least all those things that a
man's fated to know; but from sundown of one
day to sunup of the next, those two central
things were revealed to me. the years go by,
and i've told the story so many times that i'm
not sure anymore whether i actually remember
it or whether i just remember the words i tell it
with. maybe that's how it was with the captive,
with her indian raid. at this point what
difference does it make whether it was me or
some other man that saw moreira killed." 
the mirror and the mask
when the armies clashed at the battle of
clontarf, in which the norwegian was brought
low, the king spoke to his poet and said:
"the brightest deeds lose their luster if they
are not minted in words. i desire you to sing my
victory and my praises. i shall be æneas; you
shall be my virgil. do you believe you have the
gifts worthy of this task i ask of you, which shall
make us both immortal?"
"yes, great king, i do," answered the poet. "i
am oían. for twelve winters i have honed my
skills at meter. i know by heart the three
hundred sixty fables which are the foundation
of all true poetry. the ulster cycle and the
munster cycle lie within my harp strings. i am
licensed by law to employ the most archaic
words of the language, and its most complex
metaphors. i have mastered the secret script
which guards our art from the prying eyes of the
common folk. i can sing of love, of cattle theft, 
of sailing ships, of war. i know the mythological
lineage of all the royal houses of ireland. i
possess the secret knowledge of herbs,
astrology, mathematics, and canon law. i have
defeated my rivals in public contest.
i have trained myself in satire, which causes
diseases of the skin, including leprosy. and i
also wield the sword, as i have proven in your
battle. there is but one thing that i do not
know: how to express my thanks for this gift
you make me."
the high king, who was easily wearied by
other men's long speeches, said to the poet with
relief:
"all these things i know full well. i have just
been told that the nightingale has now sung in
england.
when the rains and snow have passed, when
the nightingale has returned from its journey to
the lands of the south, you shall recite your
verses before the court and the guild of poets
assembled. i give you one full year. every letter
and every word, you shall burnish to a fine
gleam. the recompense, as you know, shall not 
be unworthy of my royal wont, nor of the hours
you spend in sleepless inspiration."
"my lord, my greatest recompense is the
sight of your face," said the poet, who was
something of a courtier as well.
he bowed and retired, a verse or two already
beginning to creep into his head.
when the allotted period had passed, a time
filled with plague and rebellion, the panegyric
was sung.
the poet declaimed his verses with slow
assurance, and without a glance at his
manuscript. in the course of it, the king often
nodded approvingly. everyone imitated his
gesture, even those who, crowding in at the
doors, could not make out a word of it.
at last the king spoke.
"i accept this labor. it is another victory. you
have given to each word its true meaning, to
each noun the epithet bestowed upon it by the
first poets. in all the work there is not an image
which the classics did not employ. war is 'the
fair cloth wov'n of men' and blood is 'sworddrink.'
the sea has its god and the clouds
foretell the future. you have marshaled rhyme,
alliteration, assonance, scansion, the artifices of
erudite rhetoric, the wise alternation of meters,
and all with greatest skillfulness. if the whole of
the literature of ireland should— omen absit—
be lost, well might it all be reconstructed,
without loss, from your classic ode. thirty
scribes shall transcribe it, twelve times each."
there was a silence. then the king went on:
"all that is well, and yet nothing has
happened. in our veins the blood has beat no
faster. our hands have not gone for our bows.
no one's cheeks have paled. no one has
bellowed out a battle cry, no one has stood to
meet the viking attack. in one year, poet, we
shall gather to applaud another poem. as a sign
of our thanks, take this mirror, which is of
silver."
"i thank you," said the poet, "and i
understand and obey."
the stars of the sky once more journeyed
their bright course. once more sang the
nightingale in the saxon forests, and the poet
returned with his scroll—shorter this time than 
before. he did not recite it from memory; he
read it, visibly unsure, omitting certain
passages, as though he himself did not entirely
understand them, or did not wish to profane
them. the verses were strange. they were not a
description of the battle, they were the battle. in
the warlike chaos of the lines there stirred the
god who is three yet one, the pagan noumena
of ireland, and those who would war, centuries
after, at the beginning of the elder edda. the
poem's form was no less strange. a singular
noun might govern a plural verb. the
prepositions were foreign to common usage.
harshness vied with sweetness. the metaphors
were arbitrary, or so they seemed.
the king exchanged a few words with the
men of letters assembled about him, and he
spoke in this way:
"of your first hymn i was able to say that it
was a happy summation of all that has been
written in ireland.
this poem surpasses all that has gone before,
and obliterates it. it holds one in thrall, it
thrills, it dazzles. 
it will pass over the heads of the ignorant,
and their praises will not be yours, but the
praises of the few, the learned—ah! an ivory
chest shall hold the only copy. from the pen
that has penned such a lofty work, we may
expect one that is more elevated yet...."
then he added, smiling:
"we are figures in a fable, and it is only right
that we recall that in fables, the number three is
first above all others."
"the three gifts of the wizard, the triads, and
the indubitable trinity," was all that the poet
dared allow himself to murmur.
the king went on:
"as a token of our thanks, take this mask. it
is of gold."
"i thank you, and i understand and obey,"
the poet said.
the anniversary returned. the palace
sentinels noticed that this time the poet did not
bring a manuscript.
not without dismay did the king look upon
the poet: he was greatly changed. something,
which was not simply time, had furrowed and 
transformed his features. his eyes seemed to
stare far into the distance, or to have been
rendered blind. the poet begged to be allowed
to speak to the king. the slaves cleared the hall.
"have you not composed the ode?" asked the
king.
"i have," said the poet sadly. "would that
christ our lord had forbade it."
"can you recite it?"
"i dare not."
"i charge you with the courage that you
need," the king declared.
the poet spoke the poem. it was a single line.
unable to summon the courage to speak it
again aloud, the poet and his king mouthed the
poem, as though it were a secret supplication,
or a blasphemy. the king was no less astounded
and cowed than the poet. the two men, very
pale, looked at each other.
"in the years of my youth," said the king, "i
sailed toward the setting sun. on an island
there, i saw silver greyhounds that hunted
golden boars to their death. on another we
were feted with the fragrance of magic apples. 
on yet another i saw walls of fire. on the
most remote of all, there was a vaulted river
that hung from the sky, and in its waters swam
fish and sailing ships. those were marvels, but
they do not compare with your poem, which
somehow contains them all. what sorcery has
given you this?"
"at dawn," said this poet, "i awoke speaking
words that at first i did not understand. those
words are the poem. i felt i had committed
some sin, perhaps that sin which the holy spirit
cannot pardon."
"the sin the two of us now share," mused the
king. "the sin of having known beauty, which is
a gift forbidden mankind. now we must atone
for it. i gave you a mirror and a golden mask;
here is the third gift, which shall be the last."
he laid in the poet's right hand a dagger.
of the poet, we know that he killed himself
when he left the palace; of the king, that he is a
beggar who wanders the roads of ireland, which
once was his kingdom, and that he has never
spoken the poem again. 
"undr"
i must inform the reader that the pages i
translate and publish here will be sought in vain
in the libellus (1615) of adam of bremen, who,
as we all know, was born and died in the
eleventh century. lappenberg found the text
within a manuscript in the bodleian, at oxford;
given its wealth of circumstantial detail, he
judged it to be a late interpolation, but he did
publish it as a curiosity in his anakcta
germanica (leipzig, 1894). the opinion of a
mere argentine amateur is worth very little;
readers may judge these pages as they will. my
translation is not literal, but it is faithful. thus
writes adam of bremen:
... of the several nations that border the wide
desert which lies on the far shore of the gulf,
beyond the lands where the wild horse mates,
that one most worthy of mention is the nation
of the urns. the imprecise or fabulous reports
of merchants, the difficulty of the road, and the 
depredations of nomads prevented me from
ever reaching its borders. i know, however, that
its precarious and remote villages lie within the
lowlands of the wisla river. unlike the swedes,
the urns profess the true faith in christ,
unsullied by the arianism and bloody worship
of devils from which the royal houses of
england and the other nations of the north
draw their lineage. they are shepherds,
ferrymen, sorcerers, swordsmiths, and
ropemakers. the se-verity of their wars almost
entirely prevents them from tilling their lands.
the plains and the tribes that roam them have
made the urns skillful with horse and bow. in
time, one inevitably comes to resemble one's
enemies. their lances are longer than ours, for
theirs are made for horsemen, not for infantry.
as one might imagine, the use of pen,
inkhorn, and parchment is unknown to them.
they carve their characters in stone, as our
forebears carved the runes revealed to them by
odin, after having hung from the ash tree—
odin sacrificed to odin—for nine long nights.
to these general bits of knowledge i will add 
the story of my conversation with the icelander
ulf sigurdarson, a man of grave and measured
speech. we had met in uppsala, near the
temple. the wood fire had died; the cold and
the dawn light were seeping in through the
uneven chinks in the walls. outside, the gray
wolves that devour the flesh of pagans
sacrificed to the three gods were leaving their
cautious spoor upon the snow. our talk had
begun in latin, as is the habit between
members of the clergy, but soon we had passed
into the language of the north, known from
ultima thule to the markets of asia. this is
what the man told me:
"i am of the line of skalds; the moment i
learned that the poetry of the urns is a poetry of
a single word, i went in quest of them, in quest
of the route that would lead me to their land.
not without weariness and labor did i reach it,
one year later. it was night; i noticed that the
men i met along my way regarded me curiously,
and i could not fail to note that i was struck by
an occasional stone. i saw the glow of a smith's
forge, and i entered. 
"the smith offered me shelter for the night.
his name, he said, was orm, and his language
was more or less our own. we exchanged a few
words. it was from his lips that i first heard the
name of the king who then ruled over them—
gunnlaug. i learned that he had fought in their
last war, that he looked with suspicion upon
foreigners, and that it was his custom to crucify
them. in order to avoid that fate, which was
more fitting for a god than for a man, i
undertook to write a drapa, a laudatory
composition— a sort of eulogy praising the
king's victories, his fame, and his mercy. no
sooner had i committed the poem to memory
than two men came for me. i refused to
relinquish my sword, but i allowed myself to be
led away.
"the stars were still in the sky. we traveled
through a stretch of land with huts scattered
here and there along the way. i had heard tales
of pyramids; what i saw in the first square we
came to was a stake of yellow wood. on its
sharp point i could make out the black figure of
a fish. orm, who had accompanied us, told me 
that the fish was the word. in the next square i
saw a red stake, with a disk. orm said once
more that this was the word. i asked him to tell
me what word it was; he replied that he was but
a simple artisan, and did not know.
"in the third square, which was the last, i
saw a stake painted black, bearing a design i no
longer remember. on the far side of the square
there was a long straight wall, whose ends i
could not see. i later found that it was circular,
roofed with clay, without interior doors, and
that it girded the en-tire city.
the horses tied to a wooden post were
compact and thick-maned.
"the smith was not allowed to enter. there
were armed men inside, all standing. gunnlaug,
the king, who was suffering under some great
affliction, was lying with half-closed eyes upon
a kind of dais; his pallet was of camel skins. he
was a worn, yellow man, a sacred and almost
forgotten object; long, time-blurred scars made
a tracery across his chest. one of the soldiers
made way for me. someone had brought a harp.
i knelt and softly intoned the drapa. it was
adorned with the tropes, alliterations, and
accents required by the genre. i am not certain
that the king understood it, but he gave me a
silver ring, which i still possess. under his
pillow i glimpsed the blade of a dagger. to his
right there was a chessboard of a hundred or
more squares and several scattered pieces.
"the king's guards pushed me back. a man
took my place, but he stood as he offered his
own poem.
he plucked at the harp's strings as though
tuning them, and then very softly repeated the
word that i wish i might have caught, but did
not. someone reverently said now,
meaningless.
"i saw tears here and there. the man would
raise his voice or it would grow distant; the
nearly identical chords were monotonous, or,
more precisely, infinite. i wished the chant
could go on forever, i wished it were my life.
suddenly, it ended. i heard the sound of the
harp when the singer, no doubt exhausted, cast
it to the floor. we made our way in disorder
from the room. i was one of the last. i saw with 
astonishment that the light was fading.
"i walked a few steps. a hand upon my
shoulder detained me. a voice said to me:
" 'the king's ring was a talisman bestowed
upon you, yet soon your death shall come, for
you have heard the word. i, bjarni thorkelsson,
will save you. i am of the lineage of the skalds.
in your dithyramb you called blood "sworddrink"
and battle "man-battle." i remember
hearing those tropes from my father's father.
you and i are poets; i shall save you. now we do
not name every thing or event that fires our
song; we encode it in a single word, which is the
word.'
" 'i could not hear it,' i replied to him. 'i beg
you to tell me what word it is.'”
he hesitated for a moment, and then said:
" 'i am sworn not to reveal it. and besides, no
one can teach another anything. you must seek
it on your own. we must hurry, for your life is
in danger. i will hide you in my house, where
they will not dare come to look for you. if the
wind is with you, you shall sail tomorrow to the
south.' 
"thus began the adventure that was to last
for so many winters. i shall not tell its hazards,
nor shall i attempt to recall the true order of its
vicissitudes. i was oarsman, slave merchant,
slave, woodcutter, robber of caravans, cantor,
assayer of deep water and of metals. i suffered a
year's captivity in the mercury mines, which
loosens the teeth. i fought with men from
sweden in the militia of mikligarthr—
constantinople. on the banks of the azov i was
loved by a woman i shall never forget; i left her,
or she left me, which is the same. i betrayed and
was betrayed. more than once fate made me
kill. a greek soldier challenged me to fight him,
and offered me the choice of two swords. one
was a handspan longer than the other. i realized
that he was trying to intimidate me, so i chose
the shorter. he asked me why. i told him that
the distance from my hand to his heart did not
vary. on the shore of the black sea sits the
runic epitaph i carved for my comrade leif
arnarson. i have fought with the blue men of
serkland, the saracens. in the course of time i
have been many men, but that whirlwind of
events was one long dream. the essential thing
always was the word. there were times when i
did not believe in it.
i would tell myself that renouncing the lovely
game of combining lovely words was foolish,
that there was no reason to seek the single,
perhaps illusory, one. that argument failed. a
missionary suggested the word god, which i
rejected. one sunrise, on the banks of a river
that widened into the sea, i believed that the
revelation had been vouchsafed me.
"i returned to the land of the urns, and with
difficulty found the poet's house.
"i entered and said my name. night had
fallen. thorkelsson, from his place upon the
ground, told me to light the candle in the
bronze candelabrum. his face had aged so
greatly that i could not help thinking that i
myself was now old. as was the custom, i asked
after the health of the king.
"his name is no longer gunnlaug,' he
replied. 'now his name is other. tell me of your
travels.'
"i did so in the best order i could, and in
verbose detail, which i shall here omit. before i
came to the end, the poet interrupted me.
"did you often sing in those lands?' he asked.
"the question took me by surprise.
"at first," i said, 'i sang to earn my bread.
then, from a fear that i do not understand, i
grew distant from the singing and the harp.'
"hmm.' he nodded. 'now, go on with your
story.'
"i complied. then there fell a long silence.
"what were you given by the first woman you
slept with?' he asked.
"everything,' i answered.
"i, too, have been given everything, by life.
life gives all men everything, but most men do
not know this. my voice is tired and my fingers
weak, but listen to me....'
"he spoke the word uñar, which means
wonder.
"i was overwhelmed by the song of the man
who lay dying, but in his song, and in his chord,
i saw my own labors, the slave girl who had
given me her first love, the men i had killed, the
cold dawns, the northern lights over the water, 
the oars. i took up the harp and sang—a
different word.
" 'hmm,' said the poet, and i had to draw
close to hear him. 'you have understood me.' "
a weary man's utopia
he called it "utopia," a greek word which
means "there is no such place."
quevedo
no two mountain peaks are alike, but
anywhere on earth the plains are one and the
same. i was riding down a road across the
plains. i asked myself without much curiosity
whether i was in oklahoma or texas or the
region that literary men call "the pampas."
there was not a fence to left or right. as on
other occasions, i slowly murmured these lines,
more or less from emilio oribe:
riding through the ongoing, ongoing and
interminable terrifying plains, near the frontier
of brazil... 
the road was rutted and uneven. rain began
to fall. some two or three hundred yards down
the road, i saw the light of a house. it was squat
and rectangular and surrounded by trees. the
door was opened by a man so tall it almost
frightened me. he was dressed in gray. i sensed
that he was waiting for someone.
there was no latch or lock on the door.
we went inside, into a long room with walls
of exposed wood. from the ceiling hung a lamp
that gave a yellowish light. the table seemed
odd, somehow. there was a water clock on the
table, the first i'd ever seen, save for the
occasional steel engraving in dictionaries and
encyclopedias. the man motioned me to one of
the chairs.
i tried several languages, but we couldn't
make ourselves understood to each other. when
he spoke, it was in latin. i gathered my
recollections of my distant student days and
girded myself for conversation.
"by your clothing," he said, "i can see that
you have come from another time. the diversity
of languages encouraged the diversity of
nations, and even encouraged war; the earth
has returned to latin. there are those who fear
that it will degenerate into french, limousine,
or papiamento, but the danger is not imminent.
and in any case, neither that which has been
nor that which is to be holds any interest for
me."
i said nothing; the man went on.
"if it does not repulse you to see another
person eat, would you like to join me?"
i realized that he had seen that i was at an
utter loss, so i said i would.
we went down a corridor with several doors
leading off it and came into a small kitchen in
which everything was made of metal. we
returned to the first room with our dinner on a
tray: bowls of cornflakes, a bunch of grapes, a
fruit that was unknown to me but whose taste
was something like a fig, and a large pitcher of
water. i don't believe there was any bread. my
host's features were sharp, and there was
something peculiar about his eyes. i shall never
forget that stern, pale face that i shall never see
again. he did not gesture with his hands when 
he talked.
i was a bit tongue-tied by having to speak
latin, but at last i said:
"you are not astounded by my sudden
appearance here?"
"no," he replied, "every century or so we
receive these visits. they do not last long; you
will be back home by tomorrow, at the latest."
the certainty in his voice relieved me. i
thought it proper to introduce myself:
"i am eudoro acevedo. i was born in 1897 in
the city of buenos aires. i am now seventy years
old, a professor of english and american
literature and a writer of tales of fantasy."
"i remember having read without
displeasure," he said, "two tales of fantasy—the
travels of captain lemuel gulliver, which
many people believe to have really taken place,
and the summa theologica. but let us not talk
of facts. no one cares about facts anymore.
they are mere points of departure for
speculation and exercises in creativity. in
school we are taught doubt, and the art of
forgetting—especially forgetting all that is
personal and local. we live in time, which is
successive, but we try to live sub specie
œternitatis. there are a few names from the
past that are still with us, though the language
tends to forget them. we avoid pointless
precision. there is no chronology or history; no
statistics, either. you told me your name is
eudoro; i cannot tell you mine, because
everyone calls me 'somebody' or 'you.' "
"but what was your father's name?"
"he had none."
on one of the walls i noticed a bookshelf. i
opened a volume at random; the letters were
clear and indecipherable and written by hand.
their angular lines reminded me of the runic
alphabet, though it had been used only for
inscriptions. it occurred to me that the people
of the future were not only taller, they were
more skilled as well. i instinctively looked at the
man's long elegant fingers.
"now," he said to me, "you are going to see
something you have never seen before."
he carefully handed me a copy of more's
utopia, the volume printed in basel in 1518;
some pages and illustrations were missing.
it was not without some smugness that i
replied:
"it is a printed book. i have more than two
thousand at home, though they are not as old or
as valuable."
i read the title aloud.
the man laughed.
"no one can read two thousand books. in the
four hundred years i have lived, i've not read
more than half a dozen. and in any case, it is
not the reading that matters, but the re-reading.
printing, which is now forbidden, was one of
the worst evils of mankind, for it tended to
multiply unnecessary texts to a dizzying
degree."
"in that strange yesterday from which i have
come," i replied, "there prevailed the
superstition that between one evening and the
next morning, events occur that it would be
shameful to have no knowledge of. the planet
was peopled by spectral collectives—canada,
brazil, the swiss congo, the common market.
almost no one knew the prior history of those 
platonic entities, yet everyone was informed of
the most trivial details of the latest conference
of pedagogues or the imminent breaking off of
relations between one of these entities and
another and the messages that their presidents
sent back and forth—composed by a secretary
to the secretary, and in the prudent vagueness
that the form requires.
"all this was no sooner read than forgotten,
for within a few hours it would be blotted out by
new trivialities. of all functions, that of the
politician was without doubt the most public.
an ambassador or a minister was a sort of
cripple who had to be transported in long, noisy
vehicles surrounded by motorcyclists and
grenadiers and stalked by eager photographers.
one would have thought their feet had been cut
off, my mother used to say. images and the
printed word were more real than things.
people believed only what they could read on
the printed page. the principle, means, and end
of our singular conception of the world was esse
est percipi—'to be is to be portrayed.' in the
past i lived in, people were credulous; they
believed that a piece of merchandise was good
because the manufacturer of that piece of
merchandise said it was. robbery was also a
frequent occurrence, though everyone knew
that the possession of money brings with it
neither greater happiness nor greater peace of
mind."
"money?" my host repeated. "no one any
longer suffers poverty, which must have been
unbearable—nor suffers wealth, for that matter,
which must have been the most uncomfortable
form of vulgarity.
every person now has a job to perform."
"like rabbis," i said.
he seemed not to understand; he continued
on.
"there are no cities, either. to judge by the
ruins of bahía blanca,*which curiosity once led
me to explore, it's no great loss. since there are
no possessions, there is no inheritance. when a
man reaches a hundred years of age, he is ready
to confront himself and his solitude. he will
have engendered one child."
"one child?" i asked. 
"yes. one. it is not advisable that the human
race be too much encouraged. there are those
who think that awareness of the universe is a
faculty that comes from the deity, yet no one
knows for a certainty whether this deity exists. i
believe that what is being discussed now is the
advantages and disadvantages of the gradual or
simultaneous suicide of every person on earth.
but let us return to the matter at hand."
i nodded.
"when the individual has reached a hundred
years of age, he is able to do without love and
friendship.
illness and inadvertent death are not things
to be feared. he practices one of the arts, or
philosophy or mathematics, or plays a game of
one-handed chess. when he wishes, he kills
himself. when a man is the master of own life,
he is also the master of his death."
"is that a quotation?" i asked.
"of course. there is nothing but quotations
left for us. our language is a system of
quotations."
"what about the great adventure of my
times—space travel?" i asked.
"it's been hundreds of years since we have
done any of that traveling about—though it was
undoubtedly admirable. we found we could
never escape the here and now."
then, with a smile he added:
"and besides, every journey is a journey
through space. going from one planet to
another is much like going to the farm across
the way. when you stepped into this room, you
were engaging in space travel."
"that's true," i replied. "there was also much
talk of 'chemical substances' and 'zoological
animals.' "
the man now turned his back to me and
looked out the windows. outside, the plains
were white with silent snow and moonlight.
i emboldened myself to ask:
"are there still museums and libraries?"
"no. we want to forget the past, save for the
composition of elegies. there are no
commemorations or anniversaries or portraits
of dead men. each person must produce on his
own the arts and sciences that he has need for." 
"in that case, every man must be his own
bernard shaw, his own jesus christ, and his
own archimedes."
he nodded wordlessly.
"what happened to the governments?" i
inquired.
"it is said that they gradually fell into disuse.
elections were called, wars were declared, taxes
were levied, fortunes were confiscated, arrests
were ordered, and attempts were made at
imposing censorship—but no one on the planet
paid any attention. the press stopped
publishing pieces by those it called its
'contributors,' and also publishing their
obituaries. politicians had to find honest work;
some became comedians, some witch doctors—
some excelled at those occupations. the reality
was no doubt more complex than this
summary."
then his tone changed, and he said:
"i have built this house, which is like all
other houses. i have built these furnishings and
made these household goods. i have worked in
the fields, though other men, whose faces i have 
not seen, may well have worked them better. i
can show you some things."
i followed him into an adjoining room. he
lighted a lamp, which also hung from the
ceiling. in one corner i saw a harp; it had very
few strings. on the walls hung rectangular
paintings in which the color yellow
predominated. they did not look as if the same
hand had painted them all.
"this is my work," he said.
i examined the paintings, and i stopped
before the smallest of them, which portrayed, or
suggested, a sunset, though there was
something of the infinite about it.
"if you like it, you may take it back with you,
as a souvenir of a future friend," he said
serenely.
i thanked him, but the other canvases
disturbed me. i will not say that they were
blank, but they were almost blank.
"they are painted with colors that your
ancient eyes cannot see."
his delicate hands plucked the strings of the
harp and i could hear faint occasional notes. 
it was then that the banging began.
a tall woman and three or four men came
into the house. one would have said they were
brothers and sister, or that time had made them
resemble one another. my host spoke first to
the woman:
"i knew you would not fail to come tonight.
have you seen nils?"
"every few evenings. he is still mad about
painting."
"let us hope he has better luck at it than his
father had."
manuscripts, paintings, furniture, household
goods—we left nothing in the house.
the woman worked as hard as the men. i felt
embarrassed at my own weakness, which kept
me from being much help to them. no one
closed the door as, loaded down with our
burden, we left. i noticed that the house had a
peaked roof.
after about fifteen minutes of walking, we
turned toward the left. in the distance i saw a
kind of tower, crowned with a dome.
"it is the crematory," someone said. "the
death chamber is inside. they say it was
invented by a philanthropist whose name, i
believe, was adolf hitler."
the caretaker, whose height did not take me
aback, opened the gate to us.
my host whispered a few words. before going
in, he waved good-bye.
"there'll be more snow," the woman
announced.
in my study on calle méxico still hangs the
canvas that someone will paint, thousands of
years from now, with substances that are now
scattered across the planet.
the bribe
the story i shall tell is about two men, or
rather about an incident in which two men
played a part. the event, which is not at all
singular or fantastic, is less important than the
character of the two men involved. both were
vain, though in very different ways and with
very different results. the anecdote (for it's
really very little more than that) took place a
short time ago in one of the states of the united
states.
in my opinion, it couldn't have happened
anywhere else. in late 1961, at the university of
texas in austin, i was fortunate enough to have
a long conversation with one of the two men,
dr. ezra winthrop.
dr. winthrop was a professor of old english
(he did not approve of calling it anglo-saxon,
which suggests an artifact cobbled together out
of two separate pieces). i recall that without
ever actually contradicting me he corrected my
many errors and presumptuous temerities. i
was told that on oral examinations he never put
questions to the candidate—instead he invited
the candidate to chat about this or that subject,
leaving to the person being examined the choice
of the topic to be discussed. of old puritan
stock, a native of boston, he'd found it hard to
adapt to the customs and prejudices of the
south.
he missed the snow, but i've noticed that
northerners are taught to take measures against
the cold the way we are against the heat. the
hazy image that remains to me is that of a man
on the tall side, with gray hair, less spry than
strong. my recollection of his colleague herbert
locke is clearer; locke gave me a copy of his
book toward a history of the kenning, which
declares that the saxons soon put aside those
somewhat mechanical metaphors they used
(the sea as "whale-road," the eagle as "battlefalcon"),
while the scandinavian poets were
combining and intermingling them al-most to
the point of inextricability. i mention herbert
locke because he is an integral part of my story.
i come now to the icelander eric einarsson,
perhaps the true protagonist. i never saw him.
he had come to texas in 1969, when i was in
cam-bridge, but letters from a mutual friend,
ramón martínez lópez, have left me with the
conviction that i knew him intimately. i know
that he is impetuous, energetic, and cold; in a
land of tall men he is tall. given his red hair, it
was inevitable that students should start calling
him eric the red. it was his view that the use of 
an inevitably error-ridden slang makes the
foreigner an interloper, and so he never
condescended to use the ubiquitous "o.k." a
fine scholar of english, latin, the scandinavian
languages, and (though he wouldn't admit it)
german, he easily made a way for himself in
american universities. his first article was a
monograph on the four articles dequincey had
written on the influence of the danes on the
lake region of westmoreland. this was followed
by a second, on the dialect of the yorkshire
peasant. both studies were well received, but
einarsson thought his career needed something
a bit more "astonishing." in 1970, yale
published his copiously annotated critical
edition of the ballad of the battle of maldon.
the scholarship of the notes was undeniable,
but certain hypotheses in the introduction
aroused some controversy in the virtually
hermetic spheres of academe. einarsson
claimed, for example, that the style of the ballad
is similar, though admittedly in a distant sort of
way, to the epic fragment finnsburh, rather
than to the measured rhetoric of beowulf, and 
that the poem's employment of moving
circumstantial details oddly prefigures the
methods that we admire, not without good
reason, in the icelandic sagas. he also proposed
emendations for several readings in
elphinston's edition. in 1969 he had been given
an appointment at the university of texas. as
we all know, american universities are forever
sponsoring conferences of germanists. dr.
winthrop had chaired the previous conference,
in east lansing. the head of his department,
who was preparing to go abroad on his
sabbatical, asked winthrop to suggest a person
to chair the next one, in wisconsin. there were
really only two candidates to choose between—
herbert locke and eric einarsson.
winthrop, like carlyle, had renounced the
puritan faith of his forebears, but not their
sense of right and wrong. he did not decline to
offer his opinion; his duty was clear. since 1954
herbert locke had been of inestimable help in
the preparation of a certain annotated edition
of beowulf which, at certain institutions of
higher learning, had replaced that of klaeber;
he was now compiling a work that would be of
great usefulness to germanists: an
english/anglo-saxon dictionary that was
certain to save readers hours of often fruitless
searching through etymological dictionaries.
einarsson was much the younger. his
sharpness and impertinence had won him
general dislike, including winthrop's, but his
critical edition of finnsburh had contributed
not a little to building a reputation. and he was
disputatious; at the conference he would be a
better moderator than the shy and taciturn
locke. that was the state of winthrop's
deliberations when the incident occurred.
from the yale press there appeared a long
article on the teaching of anglo-saxon language
and literature in universities. at the end of the
last page appeared the transparent initials e.e.
and, to dispel any doubt as to the authorship,
the words "university of texas." the article,
written in the correct english of a non-native
speaker, never stooped to incivility, yet it did
have a certain belligerence about it. it argued
that beginning the study of anglo-saxon with
beowulf, a work of ancient date but a
rhetorical, pseudo-virgilian style, was no less
arbitrary than beginning the study of english
with the intricate verses of milton. it advised
that chronological order be inverted: begin with
the eleventh-century poem "the grave,"
through which something of the modern-day
language might be glimpsed, and then work
backward to the beginnings. as for beowulf,
some fragment excerpted from the tedious
3000-line amalgam would suffice—the funerary
rites of the scyld, for example, who returned to
the sea as they had come from the sea. not once
was winthrop's name mentioned, but winthrop
felt persistently attacked. the attack, if there
was one, mattered less to him than the fact that
his pedagogical methods were being impugned.
there were but a few days left. winthrop
wanted to be fair, and he could not allow
einarsson's article (already being re-read and
talked about by many people) to influence his
decision. but the decision was not easy. one
morning winthrop spoke with his director; that
same afternoon, einarsson received official
word that he would be going to wisconsin to
chair the conference.
on the day before the nineteenth of march,
the day of his departure, einarsson appeared in
ezra winthrop's office. he had come to say
good-bye and to thank him. one of the windows
overlooked a diagonal, tree-lined walk, and the
office was lined with books. einarsson
immediately recognized the parchment-bound
first edition of the edda islandorum. winthrop
replied that he knew einarsson would carry out
his mission well, and that he had nothing to
thank him for. the conversation was, unless i
am mistaken, a long one.
"let's speak frankly," einarsson said.
"there's not a soul in this university that
doesn't know that it is on your recommendation
that dr. lee rosenthal, our director, has
honored me with the mission of representing
our university. i will try not to disappoint him. i
am a good germanist; the language of the sagas
is the language of my childhood, and i speak
anglo-saxon better than my british colleagues.
my students say cyning, not cunning. they 
also know that they are absolutely forbidden to
smoke in class and that they cannot come in
dressed like hippies. as for my frustrated rival,
it would be the worst of bad taste for me to
criticize him; the kenning book clearly shows
that he has looked into not only the primary
sources but the pertinent articles by meissner
and marquardt as well. but let us not pursue
those trivialities.
"i owe you an explanation, dr. winthrop. i
left my homeland in late 1967. when a man
decides to leave his country and go to a distant
land, he inevitably assumes the burden of
'getting ahead' in that new place.
my first two little articles, which were strictly
philological, were written for reasons other than
to prove my ability. that, clearly, would not be
enough. i had always been interested in
'maldon,' which except for an occasional
stumble i can recite from memory. i managed
to persuade yale to publish my critical edition.
the ballad, as you know, records a
scandinavian victory, but as to my claim that it
influenced the later icelandic sagas, i believe
that to be an absurd and even unthinkable idea.
i included it in order to flatter english readers.
"i come now to the essential point—my
controversial note in the yale monthly. as you
must surely be aware, it presents, or attempts to
present, the case for my approach to the
subject, but it deliberately exaggerates the
shortcomings in yours, which, in exchange for
subjecting students to the tedium of three
thousand consecutive complex verses that
narrate a confused story, provides them with a
large vocabulary that will allow them to enjoy—
if by then they have not abandoned it—the
entire corpus of anglo-saxon literature. going
to wisconsin was my real goal. you and i, my
dear friend, know that conferences are silly,
that they require pointless expenditures, but
that they are invaluable to one's curriculum
vitœ."
winthrop looked at him quizzically. he was
intelligent, but he tended to take things
seriously, including conferences and the
universe, which could well be a cosmic joke.
"perhaps you recall our first conversation,"
einarsson went on. "i had just arrived from
new york. it was a sunday; the university
dining hall was closed so we went over to the
nighthawk to have lunch. i learned many things
that day. like all good europeans, i had always
assumed that the civil war was a crusade
against slavery; you argued that the south had
had a right to secede from the union and
maintain its own institutions. to make your
arguments all the more forceful, you told me
that you yourself were from the north and that
one of your forebears had fought in the ranks
with henry halleck. but you also praised the
bravery of the confederate troops. unlike most
men, i can grasp almost immediately what sort
of person the other person is. that lunch was all
i needed. i realized, my dear winthrop, that you
are ruled by that curious american passion for
impartiality. you wish above all else to be 'fairminded.'
precisely because you are from the
north, you tried to understand and defend the
south's cause. the moment i discovered that
my trip to wisconsin depended upon your
recommendation to rosenthal, i decided to take 
advantage of my little discovery. i realized that
calling into question the methodology that you
always use in your classes was the most
effective way of winning your support. i wrote
my article that very day. the submissions
criteria for the journal specify that articles may
be signed only with initials, but i did everything
within my power to remove any doubt as to the
author's identity. i even told many colleagues
that i had written it."
there was a long silence. winthrop was the
first to break it.
"now i see," he said. "i'm an old friend of
herbert's, whose work i admire; you attacked
me, directly or indirectly. refusing to
recommend you would have been a kind of
reprisal. i compared the merits of the two of
you and the result was ... well, we both know
what the result was, don't we?"
he then added, as though thinking out loud:
"i may have given in to the vanity of not
being vengeful. as you see, your stratagem
worked."
" 'stratagem' is the proper word for it,"
replied einarsson, "but i do not apologize for
what i did. i acted in the best interests of our
institution. i had decided to go to wisconsin
come what might."
"my first viking," said winthrop, looking
him in the eye.
"another romantic superstition. it isn't
scandinavian blood that makes a man a viking.
my forebears were good ministers of the
evangelical church; at the beginning of the
tenth century, my ancestors were perhaps good
solid priests of thor. in my family, so far as i
know, there has never been a man of the sea."
"in mine there have been many," winthrop
replied. "yet perhaps we aren't so different, you
and i. we share one sin, at least—vanity. you've
come to my office to throw in my face your
ingenious stratagem; i gave you my support so i
could boast of my integrity."
"but there is something else," einarsson
responded. "our nationality. i am an american
citizen. my destiny lies here, not in ultima
thule. you will no doubt contend that a
passport does not change a man's nature." 
they shook hands and said good-bye.
avelino arredondo
the incident occurred in montevideo in
1897.
every saturday the friends took the same
table, off to one side, in the café del globo, like
the poor honest men they were, knowing they
cannot invite their friends home, or perhaps
escaping it. they were all from montevideo; at
first it had been hard to make friends with
arredondo, a man from the interior who didn't
allow confidences or ask questions. he was
hardly more than twenty, a lean, dark-skinned
young man, a bit on the short side, and perhaps
a little clumsy. his face would have been
anonymous had it not been rescued by his eyes,
which were both sleepy and full of energy. he
was a clerk in a dry goods store on calle buenos
aires, and he studied law in his spare time.
when the others condemned the war that was
ravaging the country* and that the president (so
general opinion believed) was waging for
reprehensible reasons, arredondo remained
silent. he also remained silent when the others
laughed at him and called him a tightwad.
a short time after the battle of cerros
blancos,* arredondo told his friends that they
wouldn't be seeing him for a while; he had to go
to mercedes. the news disturbed no one.
someone told him to watch out for aparicio
saravia's gang of gauchos*; arredondo smiled
and said he wasn't afraid of the whites. his
interlocutor, who had joined the party, said
nothing.
it was harder to say good-bye to clara, his
sweetheart. he did it with almost the same
words. he told her not to expect a letter, since
he was going to be very, very busy. clara, who
was not in the habit of writing, accepted the
condition without protest. the two young
people loved each other very much.
arredondo lived on the outskirts. he had a
black servant woman with the same last name
as his; her forebears had been slaves of the
family back in the time of the great war. she
was a woman of absolute trustworthiness;
arredondo instructed her to tell anyone asking
for him that he was away in the country.
he had picked up his last wages at the dry
goods store.
he moved into a room at the back of the
house, the room that opened onto the patio of
packed earth.
the step was pointless, but it helped him
begin that reclusion that his will imposed on
him.
from the narrow iron bed in which he
gradually recovered his habit of taking an
afternoon siesta, he looked with some sadness
upon an empty bookcase. he had sold all his
books, even the volumes of the introduction to
law. all he had kept was a bible, which he had
never read and never managed to finish.
he went through it page by page, sometimes
with interest and some-times with boredom,
and he set himself the task of memorizing an
occasional chapter of exodus and the last of
ecclesiastes. he did not try to understand what 
he was reading. he was a freethinker, but he let
not a night go by without repeating the lord's
prayer, as he'd promised his mother when he
came to montevideo—breaking that filial
promise might bring bad luck.
he knew that his goal was the morning of
august 25. he knew exactly how many days he
had to get through. once he'd reached his goal,
time would cease, or rather nothing that
happened afterward would matter. he awaited
the day like a man waiting for his joy and his
liberation. he had stopped his watch so he
wouldn't always be looking at it, but every
night, when he heard the dark, far-off sound of
the twelve chimes, he would pull a page off the
calendar and think one day less.
at first he tried to construct a routine. drink
some mate, smoke the black cigarettes he
rolled, read and review a certain number of
pages, try to chat a bit with clementina when
she brought his dinner on a tray, repeat and
embellish a certain speech before he blew out
the lamp. talking with clementina, a woman
along in years, was not easy, because her
memory had halted far from the city, back in
the mundane life of the country.
arredondo also had a chessboard on which
he would play chaotic games that never
managed to come to any end. a rook was
missing; he would use a bullet or a coin in its
place.
to pass the time, every morning arredondo
would clean his room with a rag and a big
broom, even chasing down spiderwebs. the
black woman didn't like him to lower himself to
such chores—not only because they fell within
her purview but also because arredondo didn't
really do them very well.
he would have liked to wake up when the
sun was high, but the habit of getting up with
the dawn was stronger than his mere will. he
missed his friends terribly, though he knew
without bitterness that they didn't miss him,
given his impregnable reserve. one afternoon,
one of them came around to ask after him but
was met in the vestibule and turned away. the
black woman didn't know him; arredondo
never learned who it had been. an avid reader 
of the news, arredondo found it hard to
renounce those museums of ephemera. he was
not a thinking man, or one much given to
meditation.
his days and his nights were the same, but
sundays weighed on him.
in mid-july he surmised he'd been mistaken
in parceling out his time, which bears us along
one way or another anyway. at that point he
allowed his imagination to wander through the
wide countryside of his homeland, now bloody,
through the rough fields of santa irene where
he had once flown kites, to a certain stocky little
piebald horse, surely dead by now, through the
dust raised by the cattle when the drovers
herded them in, to the exhausted stagecoach
that arrived every month with its load of
trinkets from fray bentos, through the bay of
la agraciada where the thirty-three came
ashore, to the hervidero, through ragged
mountains, wildernesses, and rivers, through
the cerro he had scaled to the lighthouse,
thinking that on the two banks of the river
plate there was not another like it. from the
cerroon the bay he traveled once to the peak on
the uruguayan coat of arms,* and he fell asleep.
each night the sea breeze was cool, and good
for sleeping. he never spent a sleepless night.
he loved his sweetheart with all his soul, but
he'd been told that a man shouldn't think about
women, especially when there were none to be
had. being in the country had accustomed him
to chastity. as for the other matter... he tried to
think as little as possible of the man he hated.
the sound of the rain on the roof was
company for him.
for the man in prison, or the blind man, time
flows downstream as though down a slight
decline. as he reached the midpoint of his
reclusión, arredondo more than once achieved
that virtually timeless time. in the first patio
there was a wellhead, and at the bottom, a
cistern where a toad lived; it never occurred to
arredondo that it was the toad's time,
bordering on eternity, that he sought.
as the day grew near he began to be
impatient again. one night he couldn't bear it
anymore, and he went out for a walk.
everything seemed different, bigger. as he
turned a corner, he saw a light and went into
the general store, where there was a bar. in
order to justify being there, he called for a shot
of cane brandy. sitting and talking, their elbows
on the wooden bar, were some soldiers. one of
them said:
"all of you know that it's strictly outlawed to
give out any news about battles—formal orders
against it.
well, yesterday afternoon something
happened to us that you boys are going to like.
some barracks-mates of mine and i were
walking along in front of the newspaper over
there, la razón. and we heard a voice inside
that was breaking that order. we didn't waste a
second going in there, either.
the city room was as dark as pitch, but we
gunned down that loose-lipped traitor that was
talking.
when he finally shut up, we hunted around
for him to drag him out by the heels, but we saw
it was a machine!—a phonograph they call it,
and it talks all by itself!" 
everyone laughed.
arredondo had been listening intently.
"what do you think—pretty disappointing,
eh, buddy?"
arredondo said nothing. the uniformed man
put his face very near arredondo's.
"i want to hear how loud you can yell viva
the president of our country, juan idiarte
borda!"*
arredondo did not disobey. amid jeers and
clapping he gained the door; in the street, he
was hit by one last insult:
"nobody ever said cowards were stupid—or
had much temper, either!"
he had behaved like a coward, but he knew
he wasn't one. he returned slowly and
deliberately to his house.
on august 25, avelino arredondo woke up at
a little past nine. he thought first of clara, and
only later of what day it was. good-bye to all
this work of waiting — i've made it, he said to
himself in relief.
he shaved slowly, taking his time, and in the
mirror he met the same face as always. he
picked out a red tie and his best clothes. he had
a late lunch. the gray sky threatened drizzle;
he'd always pictured this day as radiant. he felt
a touch of bitterness at leaving his damp room
forever. in the vestibule he met the black
woman, and he gave her the last pesos that were
left. on the sign at the hardware store he saw
some colored diamond shapes, and he realized
it had been more than two months since he'd
thought of them. he headed toward calle
sarandi. it was a holiday, and very few people
were about.
it was not yet three o'clock when he reached
the plaza matriz. the te deum had been sung;
a group of well-dressed men, military officers,
and prelates was coming down the slow steps of
the church. at first glance, the top hats (some
still in their hands), the uniforms, the gold
braid, the weapons, and the tunics might create
the illusion that there were many of them; the
truth was, there were no more than about
thirty. though arredondo felt no fear, he did
feel a kind of respect. he asked which of the
men was the president. 
"the one there walking beside the
archbishop with the miter and staff," he was
told.
he took out his pistol and fired.
idiarte borda took a few steps, fell forward to
the ground, and said very clearly, "i've been
killed."
arredondo gave himself up to the
authorities.
"i am a red and i'm proud to say so. i have
killed the president, who betrayed and sullied
our party. i left my friends and my sweetheart
so they would not be dragged into this; i didn't
read the newspapers so that no one could say
the newspapers incited me to do this. i alone
am responsible for this act of justice. now try
me."
this is how the events* might have taken
place, though perhaps in a more complex way;
this is how i can dream they happened. 
the disk
i am a woodcutter. my name doesn't matter.
the hut i was born in, and where i'm soon to
die, sits at the edge of the woods. they say these
woods go on and on, right to the ocean that
surrounds the entire world; they say that
wooden houses like mine travel on that ocean. i
wouldn't know; i've never seen it.
i've not seen the other side of the woods,
either. my older brother, when we were boys he
made me swear that between the two of us we'd
hack away at this woods till there wasn't a tree
left standing. my brother is dead now, and now
it's something else i'm after, and always will be.
over in the direction where the sun goes down
there's a creek i fish in with my hands. there
are wolves in the woods, but the wolves don't
scare me, and my ax has never failed me. i've
not kept track of how old i am, but i know i'm
old—my eyes don't see anymore. down in the
village, which i don't venture into anymore
because i'd lose my way, everyone says i'm a
miser, but how much could a woodcutter have 
saved up?
i keep the door of my house shut with a rock
so the snow won't get in. one evening i heard
heavy, dragging footsteps and then a knock. i
opened the door and a stranger came in. he was
a tall, elderly man all wrapped up in a worn-out
old blanket. a scar sliced across his face. the
years looked to have given him more authority
than frailty, but even so i saw it was hard for
him to walk without leaning on his stick. we
exchanged a few words i don't recall now. then
finally the man said:
"i am without a home, and i sleep wherever i
can. i have wandered all across saxony."
his words befitted his age. my father always
talked about "saxony"; now people call it
england.
there was bread and some fish in the house.
while we ate, we didn't talk. it started raining. i
took some skins and made him a pallet on the
dirt floor where my brother had died. when
night came we slept.
it was toward dawn when we left the house.
the rain had stopped and the ground was
covered with new snow. the man dropped his
stick and he ordered me to pick it up.
"why should i do what you tell me to?" i said
to him.
"because i am a king," he answered.
i thought he was mad. i picked up the stick
and gave it to him.
with his next words, his voice was changed.
"i am the king of the secgens. many times
did i lead them to victory in hard combat, but at
the hour that fate decreed, i lost my kingdom.
my name is isern and i am of the line of odin."
"i do not worship odin," i answered. "i
worship christ."
he went on as though he'd not heard me.
"i wander the paths of exile, but still i am
king, for i have the disk. do you want to see it?"
he opened his hand and showed me his bony
palm. there was nothing in it. his hand was
empty. it was only then that i realized he'd
always kept it shut tight.
he looked me in the eye.
"you may touch it."
i had my doubts, but i reached out and with 
my fingertips i touched his palm. i felt
something cold, and i saw a quick gleam. his
hand snapped shut. i said nothing.
"it is the disk of odin," the old man said in a
patient voice, as though he were speaking to a
child. "it has but one side. there is not another
thing on earth that has but one side. so long as i
hold it in my hand i shall be king."
"is it gold?" i said.
"i know not. it is the disk of odin and it has
but one side."
it was then i felt a gnawing to own the disk
myself. if it were mine, i could sell it for a bar of
gold and then /would be a king.
"in my hut i've got a chest full of money
hidden away. gold coins, and they shine like my
ax," i told the wanderer, whom i hate to this
day. "if you give the disk of odin to me, i will
give you the chest."
"i will not," he said gruffly.
"then you can continue on your way," i said.
he turned away. one ax blow to the back of
his head was all it took; he wavered and fell, but
as he fell he opened his hand, and i saw the
gleam of the disk in the air. i marked the place
with my ax and i dragged the body down to the
creek bed, where i knew the creek was swollen.
there i dumped his body.
when i got back to my house i looked for the
disk. but i couldn't find it. i have been looking
for it for years.
the book of sand
... thy rope of sands...
george herbert (1593-1623)
the line consists of an infinite number of
points; the plane, of an infinite number of lines;
the volume, of an infinite number of planes; the
hypervolume, of an infinite number of
volumes... no—this, moregeo metrico, is
decidedly not the best way to begin my tale. to
say that the story is true is by now a convention
of every fantastic tale; mine, nevertheless, is
true.
i live alone, in a fifth-floor apartment on
calle belgrano. one evening a few months ago,
i heard a knock at my door. i opened it, and a
stranger stepped in. he was a tall man, with
blurred, vague features, or perhaps my
nearsightedness made me see him that way.
everything about him spoke of honest poverty:
he was dressed in gray, and carried a gray
valise. i immediately sensed that he was a
foreigner. at first i thought he was old; then i
noticed that i had been misled by his sparse
hair, which was blond, almost white, like the
scandinavians'. in the course of our
conversation, which i doubt lasted more than
an hour, i learned that he hailed from the
orkneys.
i pointed the man to a chair. he took some
time to begin talking. he gave off an air of
melancholy, as i myself do now.
"i sell bibles," he said at last.
"in this house," i replied, not without a
somewhat stiff, pedantic note, "there are several
english bibles, including the first one, wyclif's.
i also have cipriano de valera's, luther's
(which is, in literary terms, the worst of the lot), 
and a latin copy of the vulgate. as you see, it
isn't exactly bibles i might be needing."
after a brief silence he replied.
"it's not only bibles i sell. i can show you a
sacred book that might interest a man such as
yourself. i came by it in northern india, in
bikaner."
he opened his valise and brought out the
book. he laid it on the table.
it was a clothbound octavo volume that had
clearly passed through many hands. i examined
it; the unusual heft of it surprised me. on the
spine was printed holy writ, and then
bombay.
"nineteenth century, i'd say," i observed.
"i don't know," was the reply. "never did
know."
i opened it at random. the characters were
unfamiliar to me. the pages, which seemed
worn and badly set, were printed in double
columns, like a bible. the text was cramped,
and composed into versicles.
at the upper corner of each page were arabic
numerals. i was struck by an odd fact: the even-
numbered page would carry the number 40,514,
let us say, while the odd-numbered page that
followed it would be 999. i turned the page; the
next page bore an eight-digit number. it also
bore a small illustration, like those one sees in
dictionaries: an anchor drawn in pen and ink,
as though by the unskilled hand of a child.
it was at that point that the stranger spoke
again.
"look at it well. you will never see it again."
there was a threat in the words, but not in
the voice.
i took note of the page, and then closed the
book. immediately i opened it again. in vain i
searched for the figure of the anchor, page after
page. to hide my discomfiture, i tried another
tack.
"this is a version of scripture in some hindu
language, isn't that right?"
"no," he replied.
then he lowered his voice, as though
entrusting me with a secret.
"i came across this book in a village on the
plain, and i traded a few rupees and a bible for 
it. the man who owned it didn't know how to
read. i suspect he saw the book of books as an
amulet. he was of the lowest caste; people
could not so much as step on his shadow
without being defiled. he told me his book was
called the book of sand because neither sand
nor this book has a beginning or an end."
he suggested i try to find the first page.
i took the cover in my left hand and opened
the book, my thumb and forefinger almost
touching. it was impossible: several pages
always lay between the cover and my hand. it
was as though they grew from the very book.
"now try to find the end."
i failed there as well.
"this can't be," i stammered, my voice hardly
recognizable as my own.
"it can't be, yet it is," the bible peddler said,
his voice little more than a whisper. "the
number of pages in this book is literally infinite.
no page is the first page; no page is the last. i
don't know why they're numbered in this
arbitrary way, but perhaps it's to give one to
understand that the terms of an infinite series 
can be numbered any way whatever."
then, as though thinking out loud, he went
on.
"if space is infinite, we are anywhere, at any
point in space. if time is infinite, we are at any
point in time."
his musings irritated me.
"you," i said, "are a religious man, are you
not?"
"yes, i'm presbyterian. my conscience is
clear. i am certain i didn't cheat that native
when i gave him the lord's word in exchange
for his diabolic book."
i assured him he had nothing to reproach
himself for, and asked whether he was just
passing through the country. he replied that he
planned to return to his own country within a
few days. it was then that i learned he was a
scot, and that his home was in the orkneys. i
told him i had great personal fondness for
scotland because of my love for stevenson and
hume.
"and robbie burns," he corrected.
as we talked i continued to explore the
infinite book.
"had you intended to offer this curious
specimen to the british museum, then?" i asked
with feigned indifference.
"no," he replied, "i am offering it to you,"
and he mentioned a great sum of money.
i told him, with perfect honesty, that such an
amount of money was not within my ability to
pay. but my mind was working; in a few
moments i had devised my plan.
"i propose a trade," i said. "you purchased
the volume with a few rupees and the holy
scripture; i will offer you the full sum of my
pension, which i have just received, and
wyclif's black-letter bible. it was left to me by
my parents."
"a black-letter wyclif!" he murmured.
i went to my bedroom and brought back the
money and the book. with a bibliophile's zeal
he turned the pages and studied the binding.
"done," he said.
i was astonished that he did not haggle. only
later was i to realize that he had entered my
house already determined to sell the book. he 
did not count the money, but merely put the
bills into his pocket.
we chatted about india, the orkneys, and
the norwegian jarls that had once ruled those
islands. night was falling when the man left. i
have never seen him since, nor do i know his
name.
i thought of putting the book of sand in the
space left by the wyclif, but i chose at last to
hide it behind some imperfect volumes of the
thousand and one nights.
i went to bed but could not sleep. at three or
four in the morning i turned on the light. i took
out the impossible book and turned its pages.
on one, i saw an engraving of a mask. there
was a number in the corner of the page—i don't
remember now what it was—raised to the ninth
power.
i showed no one my treasure. to the joy of
possession was added the fear that it would be
stolen from me, and to that, the suspicion that
it might not be truly infinite. those two points
of anxiety aggravated my already habitual
misanthropy. i had but few friends left, and
those, i stopped seeing. a prisoner of the book,
i hardly left my house. i examined the worn
binding and the covers with a magnifying glass,
and rejected the possibility of some artifice. i
found that the small illustrations were spaced at
two-thousand-page intervals. i began noting
them down in an alphabetized notebook, which
was very soon filled. they never repeated
themselves. at night, during the rare intervals
spared me by insomnia, i dreamed of the book.
summer was drawing to a close, and i
realized that the book was monstrous. it was
cold consolation to think that i, who looked
upon it with my eyes and fondled it with my ten
flesh-and-bone fingers, was no less monstrous
than the book. i felt it was a nightmare thing, an
obscene thing, and that it defiled and corrupted
reality.
i considered fire, but i feared that the
burning of an infinite book might be similarly
infinite, and suffocate the planet in smoke.
i remembered reading once that the best
place to hide a leaf is in the forest. before my
retirement i had worked in the national
library, which contained nine hundred
thousand books; i knew that to the right of the
lobby a curving staircase descended into the
shadows of the basement, where the maps and
periodicals are kept. i took advantage of the
librarians' distraction to hide the book of sand
on one of the library's damp shelves; i tried not
to notice how high up, or how far from the door.
i now feel a little better, but i refuse even to
walk down the street the library's on.*
afterword
writing a foreword to stories the reader has
not yet read is an almost impossible task, for it
requires that one talk about plots that really
ought not to be revealed beforehand. i have
chosen, therefore, to write an afterword
instead.
the first story once more takes up the old
theme of the double, which so often inspired
stevenson's ever-happy pen.
in england the double is called the fetch or,
more literarily, the wraith of the living; in 
germany it is known as the doppelgänger. i
suspect that one of its first aliases was the alter
ego. this spectral apparition no doubt emerged
from mirrors of metal or water, or simply
from the memory, which makes each person
both spectator and actor. my duty was to
ensure that the interlocutors were different
enough from each other to be two, yet similar
enough to each other to be one. do you suppose
it's worth saying that i conceived the story on
the banks of the charles river, in new
england, and that its cold stream reminded me
of the distant waters of the rhône?
the subject of love is quite common in my
poetry; not so in my prose, where the only
example is "ulrikke." readers will perceive its
formal affinity with "the other."
"the congress" is perhaps the most
ambitious of this book's fables; its subject is a
company so vast that it merges at last into the
cosmos itself and into the sum of days. the
story's murky beginning attempts to imitate
the way kafka's stories begin; its ending
attempts, no doubt unsuccessfully, to ascend to 
the ecstasy of chesterton or john bunyan. i
have never merited such a revelation, but i
have tried to dream of it. in the course of the
story i have interwoven, as is my wont, certain
autobiographical features.
fate, which is widely known to be
inscrutable, would not leave me in peace until i
had perpetrated a posthumous story by
lovecraft, a writer i have always considered
an unwitting parodist of poe. at last i gave in;
the lamentable result is titled "there are more
things."
"the sect of the thirty" saves from oblivion
(without the slightest documentary support)
the history of a possible heresy.
"the night of the gifts" is perhaps the most
innocent, violent, and over-wrought of these
tales.
"the library of babel," written in 1941,
envisions an infinite number of books; " 'undr'
" and "the mirror and the mask" envision ageold
literatures consisting of but a single word.
"a weary man's utopia" is, in my view, the
most honest, and most melancholy, piece in the 
book.
i have always been surprised by the
americans obsession with ethics; "the bribe" is
an attempt to portray that trait.
in spite of john felton, charlotte corday,
and the well-known words of rivera indarte
("it is a holy deed to kill rosas") and the
uruguayan national anthem ("for tyrants,
brutus' blade"), i do not approve of political
assassination. be that as it may, readers of the
story of arredondo's solitary crime will want
to know its dénouement.
luis melián lafinur asked that he be
pardoned, but carlos fein and cristóbal
salvañac ,the judges, sentenced him to one
month in solitary confinement and five years
in prison. a street in montevideo now bears his
name.
two unlucky and inconceivable objects are
the subject of the last two stories. "the disk" is
the euclidean circle, which has but one face;
"the book of sand," a volume of innumerable
pages.
i doubt that the hurried notes i have just
dictated will exhaust this book, but hope,
rather, that the dreams herein will continue to
ramify within the hospitable imaginations of
the readers who now close it.
j.lb. buenos aires, februarys, 1975
shakespeare’s memory
august 25, 1983
i saw by the clock at the little station that it
was past eleven. i began walking through the
night toward the hotel. i experienced, as i had
at other times in the past, the resignation and
relief we are made to feel by those places most
familiar to us. the wide gate was open; the large
country house itself, in darkness.
i went into the vestibule, whose pale mirrors
echoed back the plants of the salon. strangely,
the owner did not recognize me; he turned the
guest register around for me to sign. i picked up
the pen chained to the register stand, dipped it
in the brass inkwell, and then, as i leaned over 
the open book, there occurred the first of the
many surprises the night would have in store
for me—my name, jorge luis borges, had
already been written there, and the ink was not
yet dry.
"i thought you'd already gone upstairs," the
owner said to me. then he looked at me more
closely and corrected himself: "oh, i beg your
pardon, sir. you look so much like the other
gentleman, but you are younger."
"what room is he in?" i asked.
"he asked for room 19," came the reply.
it was as i had feared.
i dropped the pen and hurried up the stairs.
room 19 was on the third floor; it opened onto
a sad, run-down sort of terrace with a park
bench and, as i recall, a railing running around
it. it was the hotel's most secluded room. i tried
the door; it opened at my touch. the overhead
light still burned. in the pitiless light, i came
face to face with myself. there, in the narrow
iron bed—older, withered, and very pale—lay i,
on my back, my eyes turned up vacantly toward
the high plaster moldings of the ceiling. 
then i heard the voice. it was not exactly my
own; it was the one i often hear in my
recordings, unpleasant and without
modulation.
"how odd," it was saying, "we are two yet we
are one. but then nothing is odd in dreams."
"then ..." i asked fearfully, "all this is a
dream?"
"it is, i am sure, my last dream." he gestured
toward the empty bottle on the marble
nightstand. "you, however, shall have much to
dream, before you come to this night. what
date is it for you?"
"i'm not sure," i said, rattled. "but yesterday
was my sixty-first birthday."
"when in your waking state you reach this
night again, yesterday will have been your
eighty-fourth.
today is august 25, 1983."
"so long to wait," i murmured.
"not for me," he said shortly. "for me,
there's almost no time left. at any moment i
may die, at any moment i may fade into that
which is un-known to me, and still i dream
these dreams of my double... that tiresome
subject i got from stevenson and mirrors."
i sensed that the evocation of stevenson's
name was a farewell, not some empty stroke of
pedantry. i was he, and i understood. it takes
more than life's most dramatic moments to
make a shakespeare, hitting upon memorable
phrases. to distract him, i said:
"i knew this was going to happen to you.
right here in this hotel, years ago, in one of the
rooms below, we began the draft of the story of
this suicide."
"yes," he replied slowly, as though piecing
together the memories, "but i don't see the
connection. in that draft i bought a one-way
ticket for adrogué,* and when i got to the hotel
las delicias i went up to room 19, the room
farthest from all the rest. it was there that i
committed suicide."
"that's why i'm here," i said.
"here? we've always been here. it's here in
this house on calle maipú that i am dreaming
you. it is here, in this room that belonged to
mother, that i am taking my departure." 
"...that belonged to mother," i repeated, not
wanting to understand. "i am dreaming you in
room 19, on the top floor, next to the rooftop
terrace."
"who is dreaming whom? i know i am
dreaming you—i do not know whether you are
dreaming me.
that hotel in adrogué was torn down years
and years ago—twenty, maybe thirty. who
knows?"
"i am the dreamer," i replied, with a touch of
defiance.
"don't you realize that the first thing to find
out is whether there is only one man dreaming,
or two men dreaming each other?"
"i am borges. i saw your name in the register
and i came upstairs."
"but i am borges, and i am dying in a house
on calle maipú."
there was a silence, and then he said to me:
"let's try a test. what was the most terrible
moment of our life?"
i leaned over him and the two of us spoke at
once. i know that neither of us spoke the truth. 
a faint smile lit up the aged face. i felt that
that smile somehow reflected my own.
"we've lied to each other," he said, "because
we feel that we are two, not one. the truth is
that we are two yet we are one."
i was beginning to be irritated by this
conversation, and i told him so. then i added:
"and you, there in 1983—are you not going to
tell me anything about the years i have left?"
"what can i tell you, poor borges? the
misfortunes you are already accustomed to will
repeat themselves. you will be left alone in this
house. you will touch the books that have no
letters and the swedenborg medallion and the
wooden tray with the federal cross. blindness
is not darkness; it is a form of solitude. you will
return to iceland."
"iceland! sea-girt iceland!"
"in rome, you will once more recite the
poetry of keats, whose name, like all men's
names, was writ in water."
"i've never been in rome."
"there are other things. you will write our
best poem—an elegy." 
"on the death of..." i began. i could not bring
myself to say the name.
"no. she will outlive you."
we grew silent. then he went on:
"you will write the book we've dreamed of for
so long. in 1979 you will see that your supposed
career has been nothing but a series of drafts,
miscellaneous drafts, and you will give in to the
vain and superstitious temptation to write your
great book—the superstition that inflicted upon
us goethe's faust, and salammbô, and
ulysses. i filled, incredible to tell, many, many
pages."
"and in the end you realized that you had
failed."
"worse. i realized that it was a masterpiece
in the most overwhelming sense of the word.
my good intentions hadn't lasted beyond the
first pages; those that followed held the
labyrinths, the knives, the man who thinks he's
an image, the reflection that thinks it's real, the
tiger that stalks in the night, the battles that are
in one's blood, the blind and fatal juan murana,
the voice of macedonio fernández, the ship
made with the fingernails of the dead, old
english repeated in the evening."
"that museum rings a bell," i remarked
sarcastically.
"not to mention false recollections, the
doubleness of symbols, the long catalogs, the
skilled handling of prosaic reality, the imperfect
symmetries that critics so jubilantly discover,
the not always apocryphal quotations."
"did you publish it?"
"i toyed, without conviction, with the
melodramatic possibility of destroying the
book, perhaps by fire.
but i wound up publishing it in madrid,
under a pseudonym. i was taken for a clumsy
imitator of borges—a person who had the defect
of not actually being borges yet of mirroring all
the outward appearances of the original."
"i'm not surprised," i said. "every writer
sooner or later becomes his own least intelligent
disciple."
"that book was one of the roads that led me
to this night. the others... the humiliation of
old age, the conviction of having already lived 
each day..."
"i will not write that book," i said.
"you will, though. my words, which are now
your present, will one day be but the vaguest
memory of a dream."
i found myself annoyed by his dogmatic
tone, the tone that i myself no doubt use in my
classes. i was annoyed by the fact that we
resembled each other so much and that he was
taking advantage of the impunity lent him by
the nearness of death.
"are you so sure," i said, to get back at him a
bit, "that you're going to die?"
"yes," he replied. "i feel a sort of sweetness
and relief i’ve never felt before. i can't describe
it; all words require a shared experience. why
do you seem so annoyed at what i'm saying?"
"because we're too much like each other. i
loathe your face, which is a caricature of mine, i
loathe your voice, which is a mockery of mine, i
loathe your pathetic syntax, which is my own."
"so do i," he smiled. "which is why i decided
to kill myself."
a bird sang from the garden. 
"it's the last one," the other man said.
he motioned me toward him. his hand
sought mine. i stepped back; i was afraid the
two hands would merge.
"the stoics teach," he said to me, "that we
should not complain of life—the door of the
prison is open. i have always understood that; i
myself saw life that way, but laziness and
cowardice held me back.
about twelve days ago, i was giving a lecture
in la plata on book vi of the äeneid.
suddenly, as i was scanning a hexameter, i
discovered what my path was to be. i made this
decision—and since that moment, i have felt
myself invulnerable. you shall one day meet
that fate—you shall receive that sudden
revelation, in the midst of latin and virgil, yet
you will have utterly forgotten this curious
prophetic dialogue that is taking place in two
times and two places. when you next dream it,
you shall be who i am, and you shall be my
dream."
"i won't forget it—i'm going to write it down
tomorrow." 
"it will lie in the depths of your memory,
beneath the tides of your dreams. when you
write it, you will think that you're weaving a tale
of fantasy. and it won't be tomorrow, either—it
will be many years from now."
he stopped talking; i realized that he had
died. in a way, i died with him—in grief i leaned
over his pillow, but there was no one there
anymore.
i fled the room. outside, there was no patio,
no marble staircase, no great silent house, no
eucalyptus trees, no statues, no gazebo in a
garden, no fountains, no gate in the fence
surrounding the hotel in the town of adrogué.
outside awaited other dreams.
blue tigers
a famous poem by blake paints the tiger as a
fire burning bright and an eternal archetype of
evil; i prefer the chesterton maxim that casts
the tiger as a symbol of terrible elegance. apart 
from these, there are no words that can rune
the tiger, that shape which for centuries has
lived in the imagination of mankind. i have
always been drawn to the tiger. i know that as a
boy i would linger before one particular cage at
the zoo; the others held no interest for me. i
would judge encyclopedias and natural histories
by their engravings of the tiger. when the
jungle books were revealed to me i was upset
that the tiger, shere khan, was the hero's
enemy. as the years passed, this strange
fascination never left me; it survived my
paradoxical desire to become a hunter as it did
all common human vicissitudes. until not long
ago (the date feels distant but it really is not), it
coexisted peacefully with my day-to-day labors
at the university of lahore. i am a professor of
eastern and western logic, and i consecrate my
sundays to a seminar on the philosophy of
spinoza. i should add that i am a scotsman; it
may have been my love of tigers that brought
me from aberdeen to punjab. the outward
course of my life has been the common one, but
in my dreams i always saw tigers. now it is
other forms that fill them.
i have recounted all these facts more than
once, until now they seem al-most to belong to
someone else. i let them stand, however, since
they are required by my statement.
toward the end of 1904, i read that in the
region of the ganges delta a blue variety of the
species had been discovered. the news was
confirmed by subsequent telegrams, with the
contradictions and incongruities that one
expects in such cases. my old love stirred once
more. nevertheless, i suspected some error,
since the names of colors are notoriously
imprecise. i remembered having once read that
in icelandic, ethiopia was "blaland," blue land
or the land of black men. the blue tiger might
well be a black panther. nothing was mentioned
of stripes; the picture published by the london
press, showing a blue tiger with silver stripes,
was patently apocryphal. similarly, the blue of
the illustration looked more like that of
heraldry than reality. in a dream, i saw tigers of
a blue i had never seen before, and for which i
could find no word. i know it was almost black, 
but that description of course does scant justice
to the shade i saw.
some months later, a colleague of mine told
me that in a certain village miles from the
ganges he had heard talk of blue tigers. i was
astonished by that piece of news, because tigers
are rare in that area.
once again i dreamed of the blue tiger,
throwing its long shadow as it made its way
over the sandy ground. i took advantage of the
end of term to make a journey to that village,
whose name (for reasons that will soon be
clear) i do not wish to recall.
i arrived toward the end of the rainy season.
the village squatted at the foot of a hill (which
looked to me wider than it was high) and was
surrounded and menaced by the jungle, which
was a dark brown color. surely one of the pages
of kipling contains that village of my adventure,
since all of india, all the world somehow, can be
found there. suffice it to report that a ditch, and
swaying cane-stalk bridges, constituted the
huts' fragile defense. toward the south there
were swamps and rice fields and a ravine with a 
muddy river whose name i never learned, and
beyond that, again, the jungle.
the people who lived in the village were
hindus. i did not like this, though i had
foreseen it. i have always gotten along better
with muslims, though islam, i know, is the
poorest of the religions that spring from
judaism.
we feel ordinarily that india teems with
humanity; in the village i felt that india teemed
with jungle. it crept virtually into the huts. the
days were oppressive, and the nights brought
no relief.
i was greeted upon my arrival by the elders,
with whom i sustained a tentative conversation
constructed of vague courtesies. i have
mentioned the poverty of the place, but i know
that it is an axiom of every man's belief that the
land he lives in and owes his allegiance to
possesses some unique distinction, and so i
praised in glowing terms the dubious
habitations and the no less dubious delicacies
served me, and i declared that the fame of that
region had reached lahore. the expressions on 
the men's faces changed; i immediately sensed
that i had committed a faux pas i might come
to regret. i sensed that these people possessed a
secret they would not share with a stranger.
perhaps they worshiped the blue tiger, perhaps
they were devotees of a cult that my rash words
had profaned.
i waited until the next morning. when the
rice had been consumed and the tea drunk
down, i broached my subject. despite the
previous night's experience, i did not
understand—was incapable of understanding—
what took place then. the entire village looked
at me with stupefaction, almost with terror, but
when i told them that my purpose was to
capture the beast with the curious skin, they
seemed almost relieved at my words. one of
them said he had seen the animal at the edge of
the jungle.
in the middle of the night, they woke me. a
boy told me that a goat had escaped from the
corral and that as he'd gone to look for it, he'd
seen the blue tiger on the far bank of the river. i
reflected that the scant light of the new moon 
would hardly have allowed him to make out the
color, but every-one confirmed the tale; one of
them, who had been silent up until that
moment, said he had seen it, too. we went out
with the rifles and i saw, or thought i saw, a
feline shadow slink into the shadows of the
jungle.
they did not find the goat, but the creature
that had taken it might or might not have been
my blue tiger.
they emphatically pointed out to me other
traces—which of course proved nothing.
after a few nights i realized that these false
alarms were a sort of routine. like daniel
defoe, the men of the village were skilled at
inventing circumstantial details. the tiger
might be glimpsed at any hour, out toward the
rice fields to the south or up toward the jungle
to the north, but it did not take me long to
realize that there was a suspicious regularity in
the way the villagers seemed to take turns
spotting it. my arrival upon the scene of the
sighting invariably coincided with the precise
instant that the tiger had just run off. i was
always shown a trail, a paw mark, some broken
twig, but a man's fist can counterfeit a tiger's
prints. once or twice i witnessed a dead dog.
one moonlit night we staked out a goat as a
lure, but we watched fruitlessly until dawn. i
thought at first that these daily fables were
meant to encourage me to prolong my stay, for
it did benefit the village—the people sold me
food and did domestic chores for me. to verify
this conjecture, i told them that i was thinking
of moving on to another region, downstream, in
quest of the tiger. i was surprised to find that
they welcomed my decision. i continued to
sense, however, that there was a secret, and that
every-one was keeping a wary eye on me.
i mentioned earlier that the wooded hill at
whose foot the village sprawled was not really
very high; it was flat on top, a sort of plateau.
on the other side of the mountain, toward the
west and north, the jungle began again. since
the slope was not a rugged one, one afternoon i
suggested that we climb it.
my simple words threw the villagers into
consternation. one exclaimed that the
mountainside was too steep. the eldest of them
said gravely that my goal was impossible to
attain, the summit of the hill was sacred,
magical obstacles blocked the ascent to man.
he who trod the peak with mortal foot was in
danger of seeing the godhead, and of going
blind or mad.
i did not argue, but that night, when
everyone was asleep, i stole soundlessly from
my hut and began to climb the easy hillside.
there was no path, and the undergrowth
held me back. the moon was just at the
horizon. i took note of everything with singular
attentiveness, as though i sensed that this was
to be an important day, perhaps the most
important day of all my days. i still recall the
dark, almost black, shadings of the leaves and
bushes. it was close to dawn, and the sky was
beginning to turn pale, but in all the jungle
around, not one bird sang.
twenty or thirty minutes' climb brought me
to the summit. it took me very little effort to
imagine that it was cooler there than in the
village, which sweltered down below. i had been 
right that this was not a peak, but rather a
plateau, a sort of terrace, not very broad, and
that the jungle crept up to it all around, on the
flanks of the hill. i felt free, as though my
residence in the village had been a prison. i
didn't care that the villagers had tried to fool
me; i felt they were somehow children.
as for the tiger... constant frustration had
exhausted my curiosity and my faith, but almost
mechanically i looked for tracks.
the ground was cracked and sandy. in one of
the cracks—which by the way were not deep,
and which branched into others—i caught a
glimpse of a color. incredibly, it was the same
color as the tiger of my dreams. i wish i had
never laid eyes on it. i looked closely. the
crevice was full of little stones, all alike,
circular, just a few centimeters in diameter and
very smooth. their regularity lent them an air
almost of artificiality, as though they were
coins, or buttons, or counters in some game.
i bent down, put my hand into the crevice,
and picked out some of the stones. i felt a faint
quivering. i put the handful of little stones in
the right pocket of my jacket, where there were
a small pair of scissors and a letter from
allahabad. those two chance objects have their
place in my story.
back in my hut, i took off my jacket. i lay
down and dreamed once more of the tiger. in
my dream i took special note of its color; it was
the color of the tiger i had dreamed of, and also
of the little stones from the plateau. the latemorning
sun in my face woke me. i got up. the
scissors and the letter made it hard to take the
disks out of the pocket; they kept getting in the
way. i pulled out a handful, but felt that there
were still two or three i had missed. a tickling
sensation, the slightest sort of quivering,
imparted a soft warmth to my palm. when i
opened my hand, i saw that it held thirty or
forty disks; i'd have sworn i'd picked up no
more than ten. i left them on the table and
turned back to get the rest out of the pocket.
i didn't need to count them to see that they
had multiplied. i pushed them together into a
single pile, and tried to count them out one by
one. 
that simple operation turned out to be
impossible. i would look fixedly at any one of
them, pick it up with my thumb and index
finger, yet when i had done that, when that one
disk was separated from the rest, it would have
become many. i checked to see that i didn't
have a fever (which i did not), and then i
performed the same experiment, over and over
again. the obscene miracle kept happening. i
felt my feet go clammy and my bowels turn to
ice; my knees began to shake. i do not know
how much time passed.
without looking at the disks, i scooped them
into a pile and threw them out the window.
with a strange feeling of relief, i sensed that
their number had dwindled. i firmly closed the
door and lay down on my bed. i tried to find the
exact position i had lain in before, hoping to
persuade myself that all this had been a dream.
so as not to think about the disks yet somehow
fill the time, i repeated, with slow precision,
aloud, the eight definitions and seven axioms of
ethics. i am not sure they helped.
in the midst of these exorcistic exercises, a
knock came at my door. instinctively fearing
that i had been overheard talking to myself, i
went to the door and opened it.
it was the headman of the village, bhagwan
dass. for a second his presence seemed to
restore me to everyday reality. we stepped
outside. i harbored some hope that the disks
might have disappeared, but there they were,
on the ground. i no longer can be sure how
many there were.
the elder looked down at them and then
looked at me.
"these stones are not from here. they are
stones from up there," he said, in a voice that
was not his own.
"that's true," i replied. i added, not without
some defiance, that i had found them up on the
plateau, but i was immediately ashamed of
myself for feeling that i owed anyone an
explanation. bhagwan dass ignored me; he
continued to stare in fascination at the stones. i
ordered him to pick them up. he did not move.
i am grieved to admit that i took out my
revolver and repeated the order, this time in a 
somewhat more forceful tone of voice.
"a bullet in the breast is preferable to a blue
stone in the hand," stammered bhagwan dass.
"you are a coward," said i.
i was, i believe, no less terrified than he, but
i closed my eyes and picked up a handful of
stones with my left hand. i tucked the pistol in
my belt and dropped the stones one by one into
the open palm of my right hand. their number
had grown considerably.
i had unwittingly become accustomed to
those transformations. they now surprised me
less than bhagwan dass' cries.
"these are the stones that spawn!" he
exclaimed. "there are many of them now, but
they can change.
their shape is that of the moon when it is
full, and their color is the blue that we are
permitted to see only in our dreams. my father's
father spoke the truth when he told men of their
power,"
the entire village crowded around us.
i felt myself to be the magical possessor of
those wondrous objects. to the astonishment of 
all, i picked up the disks, raised them high,
dropped them, scattered them, watched them
grow and multiply or mysteriously dwindle.
the villagers huddled together, seized with
astonishment and horror. men forced their
wives to look upon the wonder. one woman
covered her face with her forearm, another
squeezed her eyes shut tight.
no one had the courage to touch the disks—
save one happy boy-child that played with
them. just at that moment i sensed that all this
confusion was profaning the miracle. i gathered
the disks, all of them i could, and returned to
my hut.
it may be that i have tried to forget the rest
of that day, which was the first of a
misfortunate series that continues even until
now. whether i tried to forget the day or not, i
do not remember it. toward evening, i began to
think back on the night before, which had not
been a particularly happy one, with a sort of
nostalgia; at least it, like so many others, had
been filled with my obsession with the tiger. i
tried to find solace in that image once charged 
with power, now trivial. the blue tiger seemed
no less innocuous than the roman's black swan,
which was discovered subsequently in
australia.
re-reading what i have written, i see that i
have committed a fundamental error. led
astray by the habit of that good or bad literature
wrongly called psychology, i have attempted to
recover—i don't know why—the linear
chronology of my find. instead, i should have
stressed the monstrousness of the disks.
if someone were to tell me that there are
unicorns on the moon, i could accept or reject
the report, or suspend judgment, but it is
something i could imagine. if, on the other
hand, i were told that six or seven unicorns on
the moon could be three, i would declare a
priori that such a thing was impossible. the
man who has learned that three plus one are
four doesn't have to go through a proof of that
assertion with coins, or dice, or chess pieces, or
pencils. he knows it, and that's that. he cannot
conceive a different sum. there are
mathematicians who say that three plus one is a 
tautology for four, a different way of saying
“four..” but i, alexander craggier, of all men on
earth, was fated to discover the only objects that
contradict that essential law of the human
mind.
at first i was in a sort of agony, fearing that
i'd gone mad; since then, i have come to believe
that it would have been better had i been
merely in-sane, for my personal hallucinations
would be less disturbing than the discovery that
the universe can tolerate disorder. if three plus
one can be two, or fourteen, then reason is
madness.
during that time, i often dreamed about the
stones. the fact that the dream did not recur
every night left me a sliver of hope, though a
hope that soon turned to terror. the dream was
always more or less the same; the be-ginning
heralded the feared end. a spiral staircase—an
iron railing and a few iron treads—and then a
cellar, or system of cellars, leading through the
depths to other stairways that might abruptly
end, or suddenly lead into ironworks,
locksmith's forges, dungeons, or swamps. at the 
bottom, in their expected crevice in the earth,
the stones, which were also behemoth, or
leviathan—the creatures of the scriptures that
signify that god is irrational. i would awaken
trembling, and there the stones would be, in
their box, ready to transform themselves.
the villagers' attitude toward me began to
change. i had been touched by something of the
divinity that inhered in the stones the villagers
had named "blue tigers," but i was also known
to have profaned the summit. at any moment of
the night, at any moment of the day, the gods
might punish me. the villagers dared not attack
me or condemn what i had done, but i noticed
that everyone was now dangerously servile. i
never again laid eyes on the child who had
played with the stones. i feared poison, or a
knife in the back. one morning before dawn i
slipped out of the village. i sensed that its entire
population had been keeping an eye on me, and
that my escape would be a relief to them. since
that first morning, no one had ever asked to see
the stones.
i returned to lahore, the handful of disks in 
my pocket. the familiar environment of my
books did not bring the relief i sought. that
abominable village, and the jungle, and the
jungle's thorny slope rising to the plateau, and
on the plateau the little crevices, and within the
crevices, the stones—all that, i felt, continued to
exist on the planet. my dreams confused and
multiplied those dissimilar things. the village
was the stones, the jungle was the swamp, the
swamp was the jungle.
i shunned the company of my friends. i
feared that i would yield to the temptation of
showing them that dreadful miracle that
undermined humanity's science.
i performed several experiments. i made a
cross-shaped incision in one of the disks, put
that disk with the others, and shuffled them
around; within one or two conversions, i had
lost it, though the number of disks had
increased. i performed an analogous test with a
disk from which i filed a semicircular notch.
that disk also disappeared. i punched a hole
in the center of one disk with an awl and tried
the test again. that disk disappeared forever.
the next day the disk with the cross cut in it
reappeared from its journey into the void. what
mysterious sort of space was this, which in
obedience to inscrutable laws or some inhuman
will absorbed the stones and then in time threw
an occasional one back again?
the same yearning for order that had created
mathematics in the first place made me seek
some order in that aberration of mathematics,
the insensate stones that propagate themselves.
i attempted to find a law within their
unpredictable variations. i devoted days and
nights alike to establishing statistics on the
changes. from that stage of my investigations i
still have several notebooks, vainly filled with
ciphers.
my procedure was this: i would count the
stones by eye and write down the figure. then i
would divide them into two handfuls that i
would scatter separately on the table. i would
count the two totals, note them down, and
repeat the operation. this search for order, for a
secret design within the rotations, led nowhere.
the largest number of stones i counted was
419; the smallest, three. there was a moment
when i hoped, or feared, that they would
disappear altogether. it took little
experimenting to show that one of the disks,
isolated from the others, could not multiply or
disappear.
naturally, the four mathematical
operations—adding, subtracting, multi-plying,
and dividing—were impossible. the stones
resisted arithmetic as they did the calculation of
probability. forty disks, divided, might become
nine; those nine in turn divided might yield
three hundred. i do not know how much they
weighed. i did not have recourse to a scale, but i
am sure that their weight was constant, and
light. their color was always that same blue.
these operations helped save me from
madness. as i manipulated the stones that
destroyed the science of mathematics, more
than once i thought of those greek stones that
were the first ciphers and that had been passed
down to so many languages as the word
"calculus." mathematics, i told my-self, had its
origin, and now has its end, in stones. if
pythagoras had worked with these...
after about a month i realized that there was
no way out of the chaos. there lay the unruly
disks, there lay the constant temptation to
touch them, to feel that tickling sensation once
more, to scatter them, to watch them in-crease
or decrease, and to note whether they came out
odd or even. i came to fear that they would
contaminate other things—particularly the
fingers that insisted upon handling them.
for several days i imposed upon myself the
private obligation to think continually about the
stones, because i knew that forgetting them was
possible only for a moment, and that
rediscovering my torment would be unbearable.
i did not sleep the night of february 10. after
a walk that led me far into the dawn, i passed
through the gates of the mosque of wazil khan.
it was the hour at which light has not yet
revealed the colors of things. there was not a
soul in the courtyard. not knowing why, i
plunged my hands into the water of the
fountain of ablutions. inside the mosque, it
occurred to me that god and allah are two
names for a single, inconceivable being, and i
prayed aloud that i be freed from my burden.
unmoving, i awaited some reply.
i heard no steps, but a voice, quite close,
spoke to me:
"i am here."
a beggar was standing beside me. in the soft
light i could make out his turban, his sightless
eyes, his sallow skin, his gray beard. he was not
very tall.
he put out a hand to me, and said, still
softly:
"alms, oh protector of the poor ..."
i put my hands in my pocket.
"i have not a single coin," i replied.
"you have many," was the beggar's answer.
the stones were in my right pocket. i took
out one and dropped it into his cupped palm.
there was not the slightest sound.
"you must give me all of them," he said. "he
who gives not all has given nothing."
i understood, and i said:
"i want you to know that my alms may be a
curse." 
"perhaps that gift is the only gift i am
permitted to receive. i have sinned."
i dropped all the stones into the concave
hand. they fell as though into the bottom of the
sea, without the slightest whisper.
then the man spoke again:
"i do not yet know what your gift to me is,
but mine to you is an awe-some one. you may
keep your days and nights, and keep wisdom,
habits, the world."
i did not hear the blind beggar's steps, or see
him disappear into the dawn.
the rose of paracelsus
de quincey: writings, xiii, 345*
down in his laboratory, to which the two
rooms of the cellar had been given over,
paracelsus prayed to his god, his indeterminate
god—any god—to send him a disciple.
night was coming on. the guttering fire in
the hearth threw irregular shadows into the
room. getting up to light the iron lamp was too 
much trouble. paracelsus, weary from the day,
grew absent, and the prayer was forgotten.
night had expunged the dusty retorts and the
furnace when there came a knock at his door.
sleepily he got up, climbed the short spiral
stair-case, and opened one side of the double
door.
a stranger stepped inside. he too was very
tired. paracelsus gestured toward a bench; the
other man sat down and waited. for a while,
neither spoke.
the master was the first to speak.
"i recall faces from the west and faces from
the east," he said, not with-out a certain
formality, "yet yours i do not recall. who are
you, and what do you wish of me?"
"my name is of small concern," the other
man replied. "i have journeyed three days and
three nights to come into your house. i wish to
be-come your disciple. i bring you all my
possessions."
he brought forth a pouch and emptied its
contents on the table. the coins were many, and
they were of gold. he did this with his right
hand. paracelsus turned his back to light the
lamp; when he turned around again, he saw
that the man's left hand held a rose. the rose
troubled him.
he leaned back, put the tips of his fingers
together, and said:
"you think that i am capable of extracting
the stone that turns all elements to gold, and yet
you bring me gold. but it is not gold i seek, and
if it is gold that interests you, you shall never be
my disciple."
"gold is of no interest to me," the other man
replied. "these coins merely symbolize my
desire to join you in your work. i want you to
teach me the art. i want to walk beside you on
that path that leads to the stone."
"the path is the stone. the point of
departure is the stone. if these words are
unclear to you, you have not yet begun to
understand. every step you take is the goal you
seek." paracelsus spoke the words slowly.
the other man looked at him with misgiving.
"but," he said, his voice changed, "is there,
then, no goal?" 
paracelsus laughed.
"my detractors, who are no less numerous
than imbecilic, say that there is not, and they
call me an impostor. i believe they are
mistaken, though it is possible that i am
deluded. i know that there is a path."
there was silence, and then the other man
spoke.
"i am ready to walk that path with you, even
if we must walk for many years. allow me to
cross the desert. allow me to glimpse, even
from afar, the promised land, though the stars
prevent me from setting foot upon it. all i ask is
a proof before we begin the journey."
"when?" said paracelsus uneasily.
"now," said the disciple with brusque
decisiveness.
they had begun their discourse in latin; they
now were speaking german.
the young man raised the rose into the air.
"you are famed," he said, "for being able to
burn a rose to ashes and make it emerge again,
by the magic of your art. let me witness that
prodigy. i ask that of you, and in return i will 
offer up my entire life."
"you are credulous," the master said. "i have
no need of credulity; i demand belief."
the other man persisted.
"it is precisely because i am not credulous
that i wish to see with my own eyes the
annihilation and resurrection of the rose."
"you are credulous," he repeated. "you say
that i can destroy it?"
"any man has the power to destroy it," said
the disciple.
"you are wrong," the master responded. "do
you truly believe that something may be turned
to nothing?
do you believe that the first adam in
paradise was able to destroy a single flower, a
single blade of grass?"
"we are not in paradise," the young man
stubbornly replied. "here, in the sublunary
world, all things are mortal."
paracelsus had risen to his feet.
"where are we, then, if not in paradise?" he
asked. "do you believe that the deity is able to
create a place that is not paradise? do you
believe that the fall is something other than not
realizing that we are in paradise?"
"a rose can be burned" the disciple said
defiantly.
"there is still some fire there," said
paracelsus, pointing toward the hearth. "if you
cast this rose into the embers, you would
believe that it has been consumed, and that its
ashes are real. i tell you that the rose is eternal,
and that only its appearances may change. at a
word from me, you would see it again."
"a word?" the disciple asked, puzzled. "the
furnace is cold, and the re-torts are covered
with dust. what is it you would do to bring it
back again?"
paracelsus looked at him with sadness in his
eyes.
"the furnace is cold," he nodded, "and the
retorts are covered with dust. on this leg of my
long journey i use other instruments."
"i dare not ask what they are," said the other
man humbly, or astutely.
"i am speaking of that instrument used by
the deity to create the heavens and the earth
and the invisible paradise in which we exist, but
which original sin hides from us. i am speaking
of the word, which is taught to us by the
science of the kabbalah."
"i ask you," the disciple coldly said, "if you
might be so kind as to show me the
disappearance and appearance of the rose. it
matters not the slightest to me whether you
work with alembics or with the word."
paracelsus studied for a moment; then he
spoke:
"if i did what you ask, you would say that it
was an appearance cast by magic upon your
eyes. the miracle would not bring you the belief
you seek. put aside, then, the rose."
the young man looked at him, still
suspicious. then paracelsus raised his voice.
"and besides, who are you to come into the
house of a master and demand a miracle of
him? what have you done to deserve such a
gift?"
the other man, trembling, replied:
"i know i have done nothing. it is for the
sake of the many years i will study in your
shadow that i ask it of you—allow me to see the
ashes and then the rose. i will ask nothing
more. i will believe the witness of my eyes."
he snatched up the incarnate and
incarnadine rose that paracelsus had left lying
on the table, and he threw it into the flames. its
color vanished, and all that remained was a
pinch of ash. for one infinite moment, he
awaited the words, and the miracle.
paracelsus sat unmoving. he said with
strange simplicity:
"all the physicians and all the pharmacists in
basel say i am a fraud. perhaps they are right.
there are the ashes that were the rose, and that
shall be the rose no more."
the young man was ashamed. paracelsus
was a charlatan, or a mere visionary, and he, an
intruder, had come through his door and forced
him now to confess that his famed magic arts
were false.
he knelt before the master and said:
"what i have done is unpardonable. i have
lacked belief, which the lord demands of all the
faithful. let me, then, continue to see ashes. i
will come back again when i am stronger, and i
will be your disciple, and at the end of the path
i will see the rose."
he spoke with genuine passion, but that
passion was the pity he felt for the aged
master—so venerated, so inveighed against, so
renowned, and therefore so hollow. who was
he, johannes grisebach, to discover with
sacrilegious hand that behind the mask was no
one?
leaving the gold coins would be an act of
almsgiving to the poor. he picked them up
again as he went out. paracelsus accompanied
him to the foot of the staircase and told him he
would always be welcome in that house. both
men knew they would never see each other
again.
paracelsus was then alone. before putting
out the lamp and returning to his weary chair,
he poured the delicate fistful of ashes from one
hand into the concave other, and he whispered
a single word. the rose appeared again. 
shakespeare's memory
there are devotees of goethe, of the eddas,
of the late song of the nibelungen; my fate has
been shakespeare. as it still is, though in a way
that no one could have foreseen—no one save
one man.
daniel thorpe, who has just recently died in
pretoria. there is another man, too, whose face
i have never seen.
my name is hermann sörgel.the curious
reader may have chanced to leaf through my
shakespeare chronology, which i once
considered essential to a proper understanding
of the text: it was translated into several
languages, including spanish. nor is it beyond
the realm of possibility that the reader will
recall a protracted diatribe against an
emendation inserted by theobald into his
critical edition of 1734—an emendation which
became from that moment on an unquestioned
part of the canon. today i am taken a bit aback
by the uncivil tone of those pages, which i
might almost say were written by another man.
in 1914, i drafted, but did not publish, an article
on the compound words that the hellenist and
dramatist george chapman coined for his
versions of homer; in forging these terms,
chapman did not realize that he had carried
english back to its anglo-saxon origins, the ursprung
of the language. it never occurred to me
that chapman's voice, which i have now
forgotten, might one day be so familiar to me....
a scattering of critical and philological
"notes," as they are called, signed with my
initials, complete, i believe, my literary
biography. although perhaps i might also be
permitted to include an unpublished translation
of macbeth, which i began in order to distract
my mind from the thought of the death of my
brother, otto julius, who fell on the western
front in 1917, i never finished translating the
play; i came to realize that english has (to its
credit) two registers—the germanic and the
latinate—while our own german, in spite of its
greater musicality, must content itself with one.
i mentioned daniel thorpe. i was introduced 
to thorpe by major barclay at a shakespeare
conference.
i will not say where or when; i know all too
well that such specifics are in fact vaguenesses.
more important than daniel thorpe's face,
which my partial blindness helps me to forget,
was his notorious lucklessness. when a man
reaches a certain age, there are many things he
can feign; happiness is not one of them. daniel
thorpe gave off an almost physical air of
melancholy.
after a long session, night found us in a
pub—an undistinguished place that might have
been any pub in london. to make ourselves feel
that we were in england (which of course we
were), we drained many a ritual pewter mug of
dark warm beer.
"in punjab," said the major in the course of
our conversation, "a fellow once pointed out a
beggar to me.
islamic legend apparently has it, you know,
that king solomon owned a ring that allowed
him to understand the language of the birds.
and this beggar, so everyone believed, had
somehow come into possession of that ring. the
value of the thing was so beyond all reckoning
that the poor bugger could never sell it, and he
died in one of the courtyards of the mosque of
wazil khan, in lahore."
it occurred to me that chaucer must have
been familiar with the tale of that miraculous
ring, but mentioning it would have spoiled
barclay's anecdote.
"and what became of the ring?" i asked.
"lost now, of course, as that sort of magical
thingamajig always is. probably in some secret
hiding place in the mosque, or on the finger of
some chap who's off living somewhere where
there're no birds."
"or where there are so many," i noted, "that
one can't make out what they're saying for the
racket. your story has something of the parable
about it, barclay."
it was at that point that daniel thorpe spoke
up. he spoke, somehow, impersonally, without
looking at us. his english had a peculiar accent,
which i attributed to a long stay in the east.
"it is not a parable," he said. "or if it is, it is 
nonetheless a true story. there are things that
have a price so high they can never be sold."
the words i am attempting to reconstruct
impressed me less than the conviction with
which daniel thorpe spoke them. we thought
he was going to say something further, but
suddenly he fell mute, as though he regretted
having spoken at all. barclay said good night.
thorpe and i re-turned together to the hotel. it
was quite late by now, but thorpe suggested we
continue our conversation in his room. after a
short exchange of trivialities, he said to me:
"would you like to own king solomon's ring?
i offer it to you. that's a metaphor, of course,
but the thing the metaphor stands for is every
bit as wondrous as that ring. shakespeare's
memory, from his youngest boyhood days to
early april, 1616—i offer it to you."
i could not get a single word out. it was as
though i had been offered the ocean.
thorpe went on:
"i am not an impostor. i am not insane. i beg
you to suspend judgment until you hear me out.
major barclay no doubt told you that i am, or 
was, a military physician. the story can be told
very briefly. it begins in the east, in a field
hospital, at dawn. the exact date is not
important. an enlisted man named adam clay,
who had been shot twice, offered me the
precious memory almost literally with his last
breath. pain and fever, as you know, make us
creative; i accepted his offer without crediting
it—and besides, after a battle, nothing seems so
very strange. he barely had time to explain the
singular conditions of the gift: the one who
possesses it must offer it aloud, and the one
who is to receive it must accept it the same way.
the man who gives it loses it forever."
the name of the soldier and the pathetic
scene of the bestowal struck me as "literary" in
the worst sense of the word. it all made me a bit
leery.
"and you, now, possess shakespeare's
memory?"
"what i possess," thorpe answered, "are still
two memories—my own personal memory and
the memory of that shakespeare that i partially
am. or rather, two memories possess me. 
there is a place where they merge, somehow.
there is a woman's face ... i am not sure what
century it be-longs to."
"and the one that was shakespeare's—" i
asked. "what have you done with it?"
there was silence.
"i have written a fictionalized biography," he
then said at last, "which garnered the contempt
of critics but won some small commercial
success in the united states and the colonies. i
believe that's all.... i have warned you that my
gift is not a sinecure. i am still waiting for your
answer."
i sat thinking. had i not spent a lifetime,
colorless yet strange, in pursuit of shakespeare?
was it not fair that at the end of my labors i
find him?
i said, carefully pronouncing each word:
"i accept shakespeare's memory."
something happened; there is no doubt of
that. but i did not feel it happen.
perhaps just a slight sense of fatigue, perhaps
imaginary.
i clearly recall that thorpe did tell me:
"the memory has entered your mind, but it
must be 'discovered.' it will emerge in dreams
or when you are awake, when you turn the
pages of a book or turn a corner. don't be
impatient; don't invent recollections. chance in
its mysterious workings may help it along, or it
may hold it back. as i gradually forget, you will
remember. i can't tell you how long the process
will take."
we dedicated what remained of the night to
a discussion of the character of shylock. i
refrained from trying to discover whether
shakespeare had had personal dealings with
jews. i did not want thorpe to imagine that i
was putting him to some sort of test. i did
discover (whether with relief or uneasiness, i
cannot say) that his opinions were as academic
and conventional as my own.
in spite of that long night without sleep, i
hardly slept at all the following night. i found,
as i had so many times before, that i was a
coward. out of fear of disappointment, i could
not deliver myself up to openhanded hope. i
preferred to think that thorpe's gift was
illusory. but hope did, irresistibly, come to
prevail. i would possess shakespeare, and
possess him as no one had ever possessed
anyone before—not in love, or friendship, or
even hatred. i, in some way, would be
shakespeare. not that i would write the
tragedies or the intricate sonnets—but i would
recall the instant at which the witches (who are
also the fates) had been revealed to me, the
other instant at which i had been given the vast
lines: and shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
from this world-weary flesh.
i would remember anne hathaway as i
remembered that mature woman who taught
me the ways of love in an apartment in lübeck
so many years ago. (i tried to recall that
woman, but i could only recover the wall-paper,
which was yellow, and the light that streamed in
through the window. this first failure might
have foreshadowed those to come.)
i had hypothesized that the images of that
wondrous memory would be primarily visual.
such was not the case. days later, as i was
shaving, i spoke into the mirror a string of
words that puzzled me; a colleague informed
me that they were from chaucer's "a. b. c." one
afternoon, as i was leaving the british museum,
i began whistling a very simple melody that i
had never heard before.
the reader will surely have noted the
common thread that links these first revelations
of the memory: it was, in spite of the splendor
of some metaphors, a good deal more auditory
than visual.
de quincey says that man's brain is a
palimpsest. every new text covers the previous
one, and is in turn covered by the text that
follows—but all-powerful memory is able to
exhume any impression, no matter how
momentary it might have been, if given
sufficient stimulus. to judge by the will he left,
there had been not a single book in
shakespeare's house, not even the bible, and
yet everyone is familiar with the books he so
often repaired to: chaucer, gower, spenser,
christopher marlowe, holinshed's chronicle,
florio's montaigne, north's plutarch. i
possessed, at least potentially, the memory that
had been shakespeare's; the reading (which is
to say the rereading) of those old volumes
would, then, be the stimulus i sought. i also
reread the sonnets, which are his work of
greatest immediacy. once in a while i came up
with the explication, or with many explications.
good lines demand to be read aloud; after a few
days i effortlessly recovered the harsh f's and
open vowels of the sixteenth century.
in an article i published in the zeitschrift für
germanische philologie, i wrote that sonnet
127 referred to the memorable defeat of the
spanish armada. i had forgotten that samuel
butler had advanced that same thesis in 1899.
a visit to stratford-on-avon was, predictably
enough, sterile.
then came the gradual transformation of my
dreams. i was to be granted neither splendid
nightmares à la de quincey nor pious
allegorical visions in the manner of his master
jean paul*; it was unknown rooms and faces
that entered my nights. the first face i
identified was chapman's; later there was ben
jonson's, and the face of one of the poet's
neighbors, a person who does not figure in the
biographies but whom shakespeare often saw.
the man who acquires an encyclopedia does
not thereby acquire every line, every paragraph,
every page, and every illustration; he acquires
the possibility of becoming familiar with one
and another of those things. if that is the case
with a concrete, and relatively simple, entity
(given, i mean, the alphabetical order of its
parts, etc.), then what must happen with a thing
which is abstract and variable—ondoyant et
divers? a dead man's magical memory, for
example?
no one may capture in a single instant the
fullness of his entire past.
that gift was never granted even to
shakespeare, so far as i know, much less to me,
who was but his partial heir. a man's memory is
not a summation; it is a chaos of vague
possibilities. st. augustine speaks, if i am not
mistaken, of the palaces and the caverns of
memory. that second metaphor is the more
fitting one. it was into those caverns that i
descended.
like our own, shakespeare's memory
included regions, broad regions, of shadow—
regions that he willfully rejected. it was not
without shock that i remembered how ben
jonson had made him recite latin and greek
hexameters, and how his ear—the incomparable
ear of shakespeare— would go astray in many
of them, to the hilarity of his fellows.
i knew states of happiness and darkness that
transcend common human experience.
without my realizing it, long and studious
solitude had prepared me for the docile
reception of the miracle. after some thirty days,
the dead man's memory had come to animate
me fully. for one curiously happy week, i
almost believed myself shakespeare. his work
renewed itself for me. i know that for
shakespeare the moon was less the moon than
it was diana, and less diana than that dark
drawn-out word moon. i noted another
discovery: shakespeare's apparent instances of
inadvertence—those absences dans l'infini of
which hugo apologetically speaks—were 
deliberate. shakespeare tolerated them—or
actually interpolated them—so that his
discourse, destined for the stage, might appear
to be spontaneous, and not overly polished and
artificial (nicht allzu glatt und gekünstelt).
that same goal inspired him to mix his
metaphors:
 …my way of life
is fall'n into the sear, the yellow leaf.
one morning i perceived a sense of guilt
deep within his memory. i did not try to define
it; shakespeare himself has done so for all time.
suffice it to say that the offense had nothing in
common with perversion.
i realized that the three faculties of the
human soul—memory, understanding, and
will—are not some mere scholastic fiction.
shakespeare's memory was able to reveal to me
only the circumstances of the man shakespeare.
clearly, these circumstances do not constitute
the uniqueness of the poet; what matters is the
literature the poet produced with that frail
material.
i was naive enough to have contemplated a
biography, just as thorpe had. i soon
discovered, however, that that literary genre
requires a talent for writing that i do not
possess. i do not know how to tell a story. i do
not know how to tell my own story, which is a
great deal more extraordinary than
shakespeare's. besides, such a book would be
pointless. chance, or fate, dealt shakespeare
those trivial terrible things that all men know; it
was his gift to be able to transmute them into
fables, into characters that were much more
alive than the gray man who dreamed them,
into verses which will never be abandoned, into
verbal music. what purpose would it serve to
unravel that wondrous fabric, besiege and mine
the tower, reduce to the modest proportions of
a documentary biography or a realistic novel
the sound and fury of macbeth?
goethe, as we all know, is germany's official
religion; the worship of shakespeare, which we
profess not without nostalgia, is more private.
(in england, the official religion is shakespeare,
who is so unlike the english; england's sacred
book, however, is the bible.)
throughout the first stage of this adventure i
felt the joy of being shakespeare; throughout
the last, terror and oppression. at first the
waters of the two memories did not mix; in
time, the great torrent of shakespeare
threatened to flood my own modest stream—
and very nearly did so. i noted with some
nervousness that i was gradually forgetting the
language of my parents. since personal identity
is based on memory, i feared for my sanity.
my friends would visit me; i was astonished
that they could not see that i was in hell.
i began not to understand the everyday
world around me (die alltägliche umwelt).
one morning i became lost in a welter of great
shapes forged in iron, wood, and glass. shrieks
and deafening noises assailed and confused me.
it took me some time (it seemed an infinity) to
recognize the engines and cars of the bremen
railway station.
as the years pass, every man is forced to bear
the growing burden of his memory. i staggered
beneath two (which sometimes mingled)—my
own and the incommunicable other's. 
the wish of all things, spinoza says, is to
continue to be what they are. the stone wishes
to be stone, the tiger, tiger—and i wanted to be
hermann sörgel again.
i have forgotten the date on which i decided
to free myself. i hit upon the easiest way: i
dialed telephone numbers at random. the voice
of a child or a woman would answer; i believed
it was my duty to respect their vulnerable
estates. at last a man's refined voice answered.
"do you," i asked, "want shakespeare's
memory? consider well: it is a solemn thing i
offer, as i can attest."
an incredulous voice replied:
"i will take that risk. i accept shakespeare's
memory." i explained the conditions of the gift.
paradoxically, i felt both a nostalgie for the
book i should have written, and now never
would, and a fear that the guest, the specter,
would never abandon me.
i hung up the receiver and repeated, like a
wish, these resigned words:
simply the thing i am shall make me live.
i had invented exercises to awaken the
antique memory; i had now to seek others to
erase it. one of many was the study of the
mythology of william blake, that rebellious
disciple of swedenborg. i found it to be less
complex than merely complicated.
that and other paths were futile; all led me
to shakespeare.
i hit at last upon the only solution that gave
hope courage: strict, vast music—bach.
p.s. (1924)— i am now a man among men.
in my waking hours i am professor emeritus
hermann sörgel; i putter about the card
catalog and compose erudite trivialities, but at
dawn i sometimes know that the person
dreaming is that other man. every so often in
the evening i am unsettled by small, fleeting
memories that are perhaps authentic. 
jorge luis borges
a note on the translation
by andrew hurley
the first known english translation of a work
of fiction by the argentine jorge luis borges
appeared in the august 1948 issue of ellery 
queen's mystery magazine, but although
seven or eight more translations appeared in
"little magazines" and anthologies during the
fifties, and although borges clearly had his
champions in the literary establishment, it was
not until 1962, four-teen years after that first
appearance, that a book-length collection of
fiction appeared in english.
the two volumes of stories that appeared in
the annus mirabilis—one from grove press,
edited by anthony kerrigan, and the other from
new directions, edited by donald a. yates and
james e. irby—caused an impact that was
immediate and overwhelming. john updike,
john barth, anthony burgess, and countless
other writers and critics have eloquently and
emphatically attested to the unsettling yet
liberating effect that jorge luis borges' work
had on their vision of the way literature was
thenceforth to be done. reading those stories,
writers and critics encountered a disturbingly
other writer (borges seemed, sometimes, to
come from a place even more distant than
argentina, another literary planet), transported 
into their ken by translations, who took the
detective story and turned it into metaphysics,
who took fantasy writing and made it, with its
questioning and reinventing of everyday reality,
central to the craft of fiction. even as early as
1933, pierre drieu la rochelle, editor of the
influential nouvelle revue française,
returning to france after visiting argentina, is
famously reported to have said, "borges vaut le
voyage"; now, thirty years later, readers didn't
have to make the long, hard (though deliciously
exotic) journey into spanish—borges had been
brought to them, and indeed he soon was being
paraded through england and the united states
like one of those new world indigenes taken
back, captives, by columbus or sir walter
raleigh, to captivate the old world's
imagination.
but while for many readers of these
translations borges was a new writer appearing
as though out of nowhere, the truth was that by
the time we were reading borges for the first
time in english, he had been writing for forty
years or more, long enough to have become a 
self-conscious, self-possessed, and self-critical
master of the craft.
the reader of the forewords to the fictions
will note that borges is forever commenting on
the style of the stories or the entire volume,
preparing the reader for what is to come
stylistically as well as thematically. more than
once he draws our attention to the "plain style"
of the pieces, in contrast to his earlier
"baroque." and he is right: borges' prose style is
characterized by a determined economy of
resources in which every word is weighted,
every word (every mark of punctuation) "tells."
it is a quiet style, whose effects are achieved not
with bombast or pomp, but rather with a single
exploding word or phrase, dropped almost as
though offhandedly into a quiet sentence: "he
examined his wounds and saw, without
astonishment, that they had healed." this
laconic detail ("without astonishment"), coming
at the very beginning of "the circular ruins,"
will probably only at the end of the story be
recalled by the reader, who will, retrospectively
and somewhat abashedly, see that it changes
everything in the story; it is quintessential
borges.
quietness, subtlety, a laconic terseness—
these are the marks of borges' style. it is a style
that has often been called intellectual, and
indeed it is dense with allusion—to literature, to
philosophy, to religion or theology, to myth, to
the culture and history of buenos aires and
argentina and the southern cone of south
america, to the other contexts in which his
words may have appeared. but it is also a
simple style: borges' sentences are almost
invariably classical in their symmetry, in their
balance. borges likes parallelism, chiasmus,
subtle repetitions-with-variations; his only
indulgence in "shocking" the reader (an effect
he repudiated) may be the "miltonian
displacement of adjectives" to which he alludes
in his foreword to the maker.
another clear mark of borges' prose is its
employment of certain words with, or for, their
etymological value. again, this is an adjectival
device, and it is perhaps the technique that is
most unsettling to the reader. one of the most
famous opening lines in spanish literature is
this: nadie lo vio desembarcar en la un ánime
noche: "no one saw him slip from the boat in
the unanimous night." what an odd adjective,
"unanimous." it is so odd, in fact, that other
translations have not allowed it. but it is just as
odd in spanish, and it clearly responds to
borges' intention, explicitly expressed in such
fictions as "the immortal," to let the latin root
govern the spanish (and, by extension, english)
usage. there is, for instance, a "splendid"
woman: her red hair glows. if the translator
strives for similarity of effect in the translation
(as i have), then he or she cannot, i think, avoid
using this technique—which is a technique that
borges' beloved emerson and de quincey and
sir thomas browne also used with great
virtuosity.
borges himself was a translator of some note,
and in addition to the translations per se that
he left to spanish culture—a number of german
lyrics, faulkner, woolf, whitman, melville,
carlyle, swedenborg, and others—he left at
least three essays on the act of translation itself. 
two of these, i have found, are extraordinarily
liberating to the translator. in "versions of
homer" ("las versiones homéricas,"1932),
borges makes it unmistakably clear that every
translation is a "version"—not the translation of
homer (or any other author) but a translation,
one in a never-ending series, at least an infinite
possible series. the very idea of the (definitive)
translation is misguided, borges tells us; there
are only drafts, approximations—versions, as
he insists on calling them. he chides us: "the
concept of definitive text' is appealed to only by
religion, or by weariness." borges makes the
point even more emphatically in his later essay
"the translators of the 1001 nights" ("los
traductores de las 1001 noches" 1935).
if my count is correct, at least seventeen
translators have preceded me in translating one
or more of the fictions of jorge luis borges. in
most translator's notes, the translator would
feel obliged to justify his or her new translation
of a classic, to tell the potential reader of this
new version that the shortcomings and errors
of those seventeen or so prior translations have 
been met and conquered, as though they were
enemies. borges has tried in his essays to teach
us, however, that we should not translate
"against" our predecessors; a new translation is
always justified by the new voice given the old
work, by the new life in a new land that the
translation confers on it, by the "shock of the
new" that both old and new readers will
experience from this inevitably new (or
renewed) work. what borges teaches is that we
should simply commend the translation to the
reader, with the hope that the reader will find in
it a literary experience that is rich and moving. i
have listened to borges' advice as i have
listened to borges' fictions, and i—like the
translators who have preceded me—have
rendered borges in the style that i hear when i
listen to him. i think that the reader of my
version will hear something of the genius of his
storytelling and his style. for those who wish to
read borges as borges wrote borges, there is
always le voyage à l'espagnol.
the text that the borges estate specified to be
used for this new translation is the three-
volume obras completas, published by emecé
editores in 1989.
in producing this translation, it has not been
our intention to produce an annotated or
scholarly edition of borges, but rather a
"reader's edition." thus, bibliographical
information (which is often confused or terribly
complex even in the most reliable of cases) has
not been included except in a couple of clear
instances, nor have we taken variants into
account in any way; the borges foundation is
reported to be working on a fully annotated,
bibliographically reasoned variorum, and
scholars of course can go to the several
bibliographies and many other references that
now exist. i have, however, tried to provide the
anglophone reader with at least a modicum of
the general knowledge of the history, literature,
and culture of argentina and the southern cone
of south america that a hispanophone reader
of the fictions, growing up in that culture,
would inevitably have. to that end, asterisks
have been inserted into the text of the fictions,
tied to corresponding notes at the back of the
book. (the notes often cite sources where
interested readers can find further
information.)
one particularly thorny translation decision
that had to be made involved a universal
history of iniquity. this volume is purportedly
a series of biographies of reprehensible
evildoers, and as biography, the book might be
expected to rely greatly upon "sources" of one
sort or another—as indeed borges' "index of
sources" seems to imply. in his preface to the
1954 reprinting of the volume, however, borges
acknowledges the "fictive" nature of his stories:
this is a case, he says, of "changing and
distorting (sometimes without aesthetic
justification) the stories of other men" to
produce a work singularly his own. this sui
generis use of sources, most of which were in
english, presents the translator with something
of a challenge: to translate borges even while
borges is cribbing from, translating, and
"changing and distorting" other writers' stories.
the method i have chosen to employ is to go to
the sources borges names, to see the ground
upon which those changes and distortions were
wrought; where borges is clearly translating
phrases, sentences, or even larger pieces of text,
i have used the english of the original source.
thus, the new york gangsters in "monk
eastman" speak as asbury quotes them, not as i
might have translated borges' spanish into
english had i been translating in the usual
sense of the word; back-translating borges'
translation did not seem to make much sense.
but even while returning to the sources, i have
made no attempt, either in the text or in my
notes, to "correct" borges; he has changed
names (or their spellings), dates, numbers,
locations, etc., as his literary vision led him to,
but the tracing of those "deviations" is a matter
which the editors and i have decided should be
left to critics and scholarly publications.
more often than one would imagine, borges'
characters are murderers, knife fighters, throat
slitters, liars, evil or casually violent men and
women—and of course many of them "live" in a
time different from our own. they sometimes
use language that is strong, and that today may 
well be offensive— words denoting membership
in ethnic and racial groups, for example. in the
hispanic culture, however, some of these
expressions can be, and often are, used as terms
of endearment— negro/negra and chino/china
come at once to mind. (i am not claiming that
argentina is free of bigotry; borges chronicles
that, too.) all this is to explain a decision as to
my translation of certain terms—specifically
rustió (literally "little russian," but with the
force of "jew," "sheeny"), pardo/parda
(literally "dark mulatto," "black-skinned"), and
gringo (meaning italian immigrants: "wops,"
etc.)—that borges uses in his fictions. i have
chosen to use the word "sheeny" for rusito and
the word "wop" for gringo because in the
stories in which these words appear, there is an
intention to be offensive—a character's
intention, not borges'. i have also chosen to use
the word "nigger" for pardo/parda. this
decision is taken not without considerable soulsearching,
but i feel there is historical
justification for it. in the may 20, 1996, edition
of the new yorker magazine, p. 63, the
respected historian and cultural critic jonathan
raban noted the existence of a nineteenthcentury
"nigger bob's saloon," where, out on
the western frontier, husbands would await the
arrival of the train bringing their wives from the
east. thus, when a character in one of borges'
stories says, "i knew i could count on you, old
nigger," one can almost hear the slight
tenderness, or respect, in the voice, even if, at
the same time, one winces. in my view, it is not
the translator's place to (as borges put it)
"soften or mitigate" these words. therefore, i
have translated the epithets with the words i
believe would have been used in english—in the
united states, say—at the time the stories take
place.
the footnotes that appear throughout the
text of the stories in the collected fictions are
borges' own, even when they say "ed."
this translation commemorates the
centenary of borges' birth in 1899; i wish it also
to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the first
appearance of borges in english, in 1948. it is
to all translators, then, borges included, that
this translation is—unanimously—dedicated.
andrew hurley
san juan, puerto rico
june 1998
acknowledgments
i am indebted to the university of puerto
rico at río piedras for a sabbatical leave that
enabled me to begin this project. my thanks to
the administration, and to the college of
humanities and the department of english, for
their constant support of my work not only on
this project but throughout my twenty-odd
years at upr.
the university of texas at austin,
department of spanish and portuguese, and its
director, madeline sutherland-maier, were
most gracious in welcoming the stranger among
them. the department sponsored me as a
visiting scholar with access to all the libraries
at ut during my three years in austin, where
most of this translation was produced. my
sincerest gratitude is also owed those libraries
and their staffs, especially the perry-castañeda,
the benson latin american collection, and the
humanities research center (hrc). most of
the staff, i must abashedly confess, were
nameless to me, but one person, cathy
henderson, has been especially important, as
the manuscripts for this project have been
incorporated into the translator archives in the
hrc.
for many reasons this project has been more
than usually complex. at viking penguin, my
editors, kathryn court and michael millman,
have been steadfast, stalwart, and (probably
more often than they would have liked) inspired
in seeing it through. one could not possibly
have had more supportive colleagues, or coconspirators,
who stuck by one with any greater
solidarity.
many, many people have given me advice,
answered questions, and offered support of all
kinds—they know who they are, and will forgive
me, i know, for not mentioning them all
personally; i have been asked to keep these
acknowledgments brief. but two people, carter
wheelock and margaret sayers peden, have
contributed in an especially important and
intimate way, and my gratitude to them cannot
go unexpressed here. carter wheelock read
word by word through an "early-final" draft of
the translation, comparing it against the
spanish for omissions, misperceptions and
mistranslations, and errors of fact. this
translation is the cleaner and more honest for
his efforts. margaret sayers peden (a.k.a.fetch),
one of the finest translators from spanish
working in the world today, was engaged by the
publisher to be an outside editor for this
volume. fetch read through the late stages of
the translation, comparing it with the spanish,
suggesting changes that ranged from
punctuation to "readings."
translators want to translate, love to
translate; for a translator at the height of her
powers to read a translation in this painstaking
way and yet, while suggesting changes and
improvements, to respect the other translator's
work, his approach, his thought processes and
creativity—even to applaud the other
translator's (very) occasional strokes of
brilliance—is to engage in an act of selflessness
that is almost superhuman. she made the usual
somewhat tedious editing process a joy.
i would never invoke carter wheelock's and
fetch peden's readings of the manuscripts of
this translation—or those of michael millman
and the other readers at viking penguin—as
giving it any authority or credentials or
infallibility beyond its fair deserts, but i must
say that those readings have given me a security
in this translation that i almost surely would
not have felt so strongly without them. i am
deeply and humbly indebted.
first, last, always, and in number of words
inversely proportional to my gratitude—i thank
my wife, isabel garayta.
andrew hurley
san juan, puerto rico
june 1998
notes to the fictions
these notes are intended only to supply
information that a latin american (and
especially argentine or uruguayan) reader
would have and that would color or determine
his or her reading of the stories.
generally, therefore, the notes cover only
argentine history and culture; i have presumed
the reader to possess more or less the range of
general or world history or culture that jlb
makes constant reference to, or to have access
to such reference books and other sources as
would supply any need there. there is no
intention here to produce an "annotated
borges," but rather only to illuminate certain
passages that might remain obscure, or even be
misunderstood, without that information.
for these notes, i am deeply indebted to a
dictionary of borges by evelyn fishburn and
psiche hughes (london: duckworth, 1990).
other dictionaries, encyclopedias, reference
books, biographies, and works of criticism have
been consulted, but none has been as thorough 
and immediately useful as the dictionary of
borges. in many places, and especially where i
quote fishburn and hughes directly, i cite their
contribution, but i have often paraphrased
them without direct attribution; i would not
want anyone to think, however, that i am
unaware or unappreciative of the use i have
made of them. any errors are my own
responsibility, of course, and should not be
taken to reflect on them or their work in any
way.
another book that has been invaluable is
emir rodriguez monegal's jorge luis borges:
a literary biography (new york: paragon
press, [paper] 1988), now out of print. in the
notes, i have cited this work as "rodriguez
monegal, p. x."
the names of arab and persian figures that
appear in the stories are taken, in the case of
historical persons, from the english
transliterations of philip k. hitti in his work
history of the arabs from the earliest times to
the present (new york: macmillan, 1951). (jlb
himself cites hitti as an authority in this field.) 
in the case of fictional characters, the translator
has used the system of transliteration implicit
in hitti's historical names in comparison with
the same names in spanish transliteration.—
translator.
notes to a universal history of iniquity,
pp. 1-64
for the peculiarities of the text of the fictions
in this volume, the reader is referred to a note
on the translation.
preface to the first edition
p. 3:evaristo carriego: carriego(1883-1912)
was in fact a popular poet and playwright, and
the "particular biography" was the one borges
himself wrote of him (published 1930).carriego
was only a mediocre poet, perhaps, and he left
but a single volume (misas herejes, "heretical
masses") upon his early death by tuberculosis,
but his ties to "old buenos aires," and especially
to the lower-class (and mostly italian) suburb of
palermo, made him an important figure for
borges. while it is probably exaggerated to say 
that much of jlb's fascination with the
compadre (see the note to the title of "man on
pink corner" below) and the knife fights and
tangos that are associated with that "type" can
be traced to carriego, there is no doubt that as
an example of the literary possibilities to which
such subject matter can be put, carriego was
very important to jlb and jlb's imagination.
carriego was also the first professional writer
borges had ever run across, a man who made
his living at writing, and not some "mere"
amateur; he held out therefore the possibilities
of a true literary "career" to match borges' clear
literary "calling."
preface to the 1954 edition
p. 4:baltasar gradan: gracián (1601-1658)
was a jesuit priest and a writer (and sometime
aesthetician) of the baroque.
his name is associated with a treatise called
agudeza yarte de ingenio ("keenness of mind
and the art of wit"), and with the spanish
baroque poets francisco quevedo and luis de
góngora. 
the cruel redeemer lazarus morell
p. 6: pedro figari: figari (1861-1938) was a
uruguayan painter "who used fauvist
techniques [rodriguez monegal, p.
194]," (this perhaps explains his success in
paris, where he lived from 1925 to 1933) and
who spent an important part of his life in
buenos aires (1921-1925).borges knew the
painter rather well and wrote an introduction to
a book on him; figari was also feted by the
literary group associated with the review
martín fierro, of which borges was an
important member. his work "was inspired by
the life of negroes and gauchos" (oeuvres
complètes, vol. i, ed.
jean pierre bernés [paris: gallimard, p.
1489].
p. 6: vicente rossi: rossi (1871-1945) was
the author of a volume titled cosas de negros
("negro matters" [1926]), to which this mention
surely points, but he also produced the first
reference book on the birth and development of
argentine theater and an important book on the
gaucho. he was, then, something of a folklorist
and literary historian. in evaristo carriego,
borges calls rossi "our best writer of combat
prose." p. 6:
antonio("falucho" )ruiz: "falucho"(d.1824)
was a black argentine soldier who fought in the
wars of independence. his statue once stood
near that of general san martin near the center
of buenos aires.
p. 6: the stout bayonet charge of the
regiment of "blacks and tans"... against that
famous hill near montevideo: on the last day of
1812 a troop of soldiers made up of negroes and
mulattoes (the reference to the english military
group organized to fight the irish independence
uprising is the translator's, but it is almost
inevitable, and the irony of the situation would
not be lost on borges; see the story "theme of
the hero and traitor" in fictions), under the
leadership of the argentine general miguel
estanislao soler, defeated the spanish troops at
the cerrito, a prominent hill overlooking
montevideo.
p. 6: lazarus morell: this particular rogue's 
true name seems to have been john a. murrell
(bernard de voto, mark twain's america
[boston: little, brown, 1932], pp. 16-17et seq.)
or murell (mark twain, life on the mississippi,
intra. james m. cox [new york: penguin, 1984
(orig. publication, in united states by james r.
osgood in 1883)].) interestingly, twain never
gives the rogue's first name; it is possible, then,
that jlb, needing a name, took "lazarus" to fit
the ironic notion that morell gave a second life
to the slaves he freed.
p. 12: "i walked four days.. .my course for
natchez": here borges is quoting/translating
fairly directly from twain's life on the
mississippi, pp. 214-215 (penguin ed. cited in
the note just above). throughout this story, jlb
inserts a phrase here, a sentence there from
twain, but then, when he says he is quoting, as
in the case of the preaching and horse thieving,
he is in reality inventing the quotation and
imagining a scene that twain only suggests. 
the widow ching—pirate
p. 19: aixa's rebuke to boabdil: boabdil is
abu abdallah, the last moorish king of granada
(r. 1482-1492); aixa was his mother. the
reproof that supposedly was given boabdil by
aixa upon the moors' defeat and expulsion
from what had been islamic spain is
substantially as borges reports it here, and the
words here given anne bonney are substantially
those given in gösse's history of piracy, p.
203. (see the "index of sources" p. 64.) p. 21:
rules for pirates: these may actually be found,
as quoted, but in a different order, in gösse's
history of piracy, p. 272. (see "index of
sources," p. 64, for bibliographical
information.) p. 24: quotation on peace in the
waters of china: gosse, p. 278. note also that
the widow's new name, while indeed given in
gosse, is attributed to another personage who
learned a lesson from the emperor. this is but
one of countless examples of the way jlb
changes things, even dates, to fit his purposes,
purposes that one must confess sometimes are
enigmatic. why change the date of tom castro's 
being found guilty from february 26 to
february 27? monk eastman's death from
december 26 to december 25? the spelling of
morell/murrell/murell's name? here the theory
of translation must needs be a theory of artistic
creativity.
monk eastman, purveyor of iniquities
p. 25: resigned: borges uses this curious
word, which i have not wanted to "interpret,"
apparently to indicate the fatedness, or ritual
aspect, of this duel. it is as though the word
indicated "resigned to fate." this aspect of
violence, of duels, can be seen throughout
borges; i would especially refer the reader to
the story titled "the encounter," in the volume
brodie's report, p. 364.
p. 28: junin: site of a famous battle in the
wars of independence. the battle of junin took
place in the then department of peru; on august
6, 1824, a cavalry engagement was fought
between simón bolivar's nationalist forces and
the royalist forces under josé de canterac. the
tide was turning against the independence
forces until the royalist rear was attacked by a
force of peruvian hussars under the command
of isidoro suárez—one of jlb's forebears and a
man who in varying degrees and under varying
permutations lends his name to jlb's fictions.
the royalists were routed.
p. 30: the death of monk eastman: this
story is taken, as jlb indicates, from asbury's
the gangs of new york, generally pp. 274-298,
but also, for the quotation about "nicks in his
stick," p. xviii. where jlb has clearly borrowed
directly from asbury and it has been possible to
use asbury's words, the translator has done so;
in other cases, the translator has just borrowed
the appropriate terminology, such as the
"mikado tuck-ups" and the "stuss" games.
the disinterested killer bill harrigan
p. 32: always coiled and ready to strike:
one of the sources that jlb gives for this story
is frederick watson's a century of gunmen,
though the truth is, there is not much there that
jlb seems actually to have used. with, that is,
the possible exception of this phrase, siempre 
aculebrado in the spanish, which the translator
has rendered conjecturally in this way.
"aculebrado," from the spanish culebra,
"snake," calls to mind in the native spanish
speaker the notion of "coiled, like a snake" and
also of "snakelike, slithering." on page 77 of his
book, watson quotes an old western novel,
which says this: "it's not the custom to war
without fresh offence, openly given. you must
not smile and shoot. you must not shoot an
unarmed man, and you must not shoot an
unwarned man-----the rattlesnake's code, to
warn before he strikes, no better, [i.e., there's
no better extant code for a man of the west]: a
queer, lop-sided, topsy-turvy, jumbled and
senseless code—but a code for all that." thus it
seems that jlb may have wanted to paint billy
the kid as an even worse "varmint" than the
rattlesnake, since the rattlesnake at least gives
fair warning, unlike billy, who, as we see in a
moment, shoots the mexican villagrán before
villagran knows what's happening. perhaps, in
fact, that was what made billy the kid so
dangerous—so dangerous that his friend pat
garrison shot him in cold blood. but whatever
jlb's motivation for this word, it is a very
mysterious one to use here, however related to
all the other animal imagery used throughout
this volume.
the uncivil teacher of court etiquette:
kôtsukéno suké
p. 36:rônins: in a. b. mitford's tales of old
japan, which is the source of much of this
story, mitford inevitably uses this word for the
"loyal retainers" of the dead nobleman. the
word "rônin" means literally a "wave-man,"
one who is tossed about hither and thither, as a
wave of the sea. it is used "to designate persons
of gentle blood, entitled to bear arms, who,
having become separated from their feudal
lords [or in this case, of course, vice versa],
wander about the country in the capacity of
knights-errant. some went into trade, and
became simple wardsmen" (mitford).
while borges himself does not use this word,
the word is inevitably used in english reports of
the phenomenon, and so the translator has
thought it appropriate to translate what the
spanish has as "retainers," "captains," etc., by
the technical word.
it is possible, of course, that jlb is doing
with the chinese system of loyalties what he did
to the world's architecture: remaking it in the
likeness of argentina's. one notes that virtually
all the houses that jlb uses in his fictions have
long, narrow en-trances and interior patios, the
very floor plan of the buenos aires house of the
end of the nineteenth century. likewise, one
senses that jlb may have used the word
"captains" in the story to indicate the sort of
relationship between the lord and his retainers
that was common in the argentina of caudillos
and their captains. thus the translator
recognizes that if jlb was trying, consciously or
not, to produce this effect, it may be somewhat
risky to go all the way to the source, to "rônin,"
for the "translation." the reader is notified.
likewise, "chushingura" is the name by which
the dramas, poems, and films are inevitably
known in english, so the translator has
incorporated that inevitable cultural reference. 
from its absence in the spanish text, one
supposes that in spanish the word
"chushingura" was not used.
p. 39: the source for this story: much of this
story is indeed taken from mitford's tales of
old japan, pp. 3-19. the translator has taken
the spelling of the characters' names and
several quotations, such as the "satsumiman's,"
from there.
man on pink corner
p. 45: title: the title of this story in spanish
is "hombre de la esquina rosada"; it presents
many intriguing possibilities, and therefore
many problems, to the translator, not so much
for the words as for the cultural assumptions
underlying them. this story is in a way a
portrait of the compadrito (the tough guy of the
slums) or the cuchillero (knife fighter) and his
life; as such, many items of that "local color"
that borges deplored in, for example, stories of
the "exotic" orient are found, though casually
and unemphatically presented. the first thing
that must be dealt with is perhaps that "pink
corner." esquina ("corner") is both the actual
street corner (as other translations of this story
have given it, without the colorful adjective)
and the neighbor-hood general-store-and-bar,
generally located on corners, which was the
hangout for the lowlife of the barrio. the reader
can see this establishment clearly in
"unworthy" (in the volume tided brodie's
report) and more fieetingly in many other
stories. what of the adjective "pink" (rosada)
then? the buenos aires of jlb's memory and
imagination still had high, thick stucco or
plastered brick walls lining the streets, such as
the reader may see in the colonial cities of the
caribbean and central and south america even
today: havana, san juan, santo domingo in the
dominican republic, etc. those walls in buenos
aires were painted generally bright pastel
colors; borges refers to "sky blue" walls more
even than to pink ones.
thus borges was able to evoke in two words
(esquina rosada) an old neighborhood of
buenos aires, populated by toughs and knife
fighters, and characterized by bars and
bordellos in which that "scandalous" dance the
tango was danced. (in its beginnings, the tango
was so scandalous that no respectable woman
would dance it, and one would see two men—
compadritos—dancing together on street
corners; nor would the tenement houses, which
had moved into the large old houses vacated by
the higher classes, allow such goings-on, even
though these conventillos, as they were called,
might be none too "respectable"—certainly
none too "genteel"—themselves.) in evoking
that old buenos aires, borges also evoked "the
man"—here, the yardmaster, rosendo juárez,
and the nameless narrator of the story, all of
whom participate in the coldly violent ethos of
the orillero, the (to us, today) exaggeratedly
macho slum dweller (especially along the banks
of the maldonado [see note below]) who
defended his honor against even the most
imagined slight. however, certain aspects of
this "man" will probably strike the nonargentine
reader as curious—for example, those
"boots with high-stacked heels" (in the original
spanish, "women's shoes") and that "red
carnation" in the first paragraph of the story
"monk eastman, purveyor of iniquities," the
same sort of carnation that appears in this
story. there is also the shawl worn by the
gaucho-like yardmaster. these elements,
however, were authentic "touches"; the
compadrito affected these appearances.
previous translations have apparently tried to
give all this "information" by calling the story
"street-corner man," emphasizing the "tough
guy hanging out on the corner" aspect of the
story, and one can be sympathetic to that
solution. another intriguing possibility,
however, is suggested by bernés in the first
volume of the gallimard edition of jlb's
oeuvres complètes. i translate the relevant
paragraph: "the title of the original publication,
which omits the definite article, reminds the
reader of the title of a painting given in the
catalog of an art exhibit. it stresses the graphic
aspect of the scene, which borges, in the preface
to the 1935 edition, called the 'pictorial
intention' of his work. one should think of
some title of a piece by pedro figari-----[p. 
1497] " this "impressionist" tide, then, should
perhaps be retained; what one loses in
"information" one gains in suggestion.
p. 45: maldonado: the maldonado was a
creek that at the time of this story (and many
others of jlb's stories) marked the northern
boundary of the city of buenos aires. the
neighborhood around this area was called
palermo, or also maldonado. this story evokes
its atmosphere at one period (perhaps partly
legendary); the maldonado (barrio) was a rough
place, and the creek was terribly polluted by the
tanneries along its banks.
p. 45: don nicolas paredes... morel: paredes
was a famous knife fighter and ward boss for
the conservative party in palermo; morel was
another famed political boss, or caudillo.
p. 52:1 couldn't say whether they gutted
him: here and elsewhere in borges (one thinks,
of course, especially of the story titled " the
story from rosendo juárez" in the volume
brodie's report and the story in this volume
tided "the cruel redeemer lazarus morell"), a
corpse is gutted, or somebody thinks about
gutting it. this, according to folk wisdom, is to
keep the body from floating up and revealing
the murder before die culprit has had good time
to get away. apparentìy a gutted body did not
produce as much gas, or the gas (obviously)
would not be contained in an inner cavity. thus
there is an unacknowledged "piece of
information" here that the ruffians of the
maldonado and other such neighborhoods
tacitly shared—tacitly because it was so obvious
that no one needed to spell it out.
etcetera
a theologian in death
p. 54: attribution: the swedenborg
concordance: a complete work of reference
to the theological writings of emanuel
swedenborg, based on the original latin
writings of the author, compiled, edited, and
translated by the rev. john faulkner potts,
b.a., 4vols.(london: swedenborg society,
1888). the text quoted here appears in the
index ( 
p. 622 of the appropriate volume) under
"melancthon" and is a mixture of the entries
indicating two different swedenborg texts: a
continuation of the last judgment and the
true christian religion. the reader may find
the text under "c.j. 47" and "1.797, 1-4." the
full entry on melancthon in the concordance
runs to p. 624.
the chamber of statues
p. 56: attribution: freely taken from sir
richard burton's book of the thousand nights
and a night (new york: heritage press, 1934
[1962] ), pp. 1319-1321. the reader is referred to
a note on the translation for more detailed
comment on jlb's and the translator's uses of
translations.
the story of the two dreamers
p. 57: attribution: this is freely adapted
from a different version of the 1001 nights,
edward william lane's the arabian nights
entertainments—or the thousand and one
nights (new york: tudor pubi., 1927), p. 1156. 
there are several other editions of this work, so
the reader may find the tale in another place;
lane does not divide his book quite in the way
jlb indicates.
the mirror of ink
p. 62: attribution: one would not want to
spoil jlb's little joke, if joke it is, but others
before me have pointed out the discrepancy
between this attribution and the fact. this story
appears nowhere in burton's lake regions and
only sketchily in the volume that digiovanni
and many others give as the source: edward
william lane's manners and customs of the
modern egyptians (1837). nonetheless, where
borges does seem to be translating (or
calquing) the words of the last-named book, i
have incorporated lane's wording and word
choices.
mahomed's double
p. 63: attribution: emanuel swedenborg,
the true christian religion, containing the
universal theology of the new church, 
foretold by the lord, danielvii,13,14, and in
the apocalypse xxi, ï, 2, translated from the
latin of es
(new york: american swedenborg printing
and publishing society, 1886),îj.829-830.
index of sources
p. 64: source for "the improbable impostor
tom castro": the source given by borges here
is the philip gosse book the history of piracy;
as one can clearly see, it is the same source cited
for "the widow ching—pirate," just below it. in
my view, this attribution is the result of an
initial error seized upon by borges for another
of his "plays with sources"; as he subsequently
admitted freely, and as many critics have noted,
much of this story comes from the
encyclopcedia britannica, eleventh edition, in
the article titled "tichborne clairmant." here
again, where jlb is clearly translating or
calquing that source, i have followed it without
slavish "transliteration" of jlb's spanish.
p. 64: source for "the disinterested killer
bill harrigan": neither the walter noble burns 
book nor the frederick watson book contains
anything remotely approaching the story given
by borges here. some details are "correct" (if
that is the word), such as billy's long and
blasphemous dying, spewing spanish curses,
but little in the larger pattern of the "biography"
seems to conform to "life." while borges
claimed in the "autobiographical essay"
(written with norman thomas digiovanni and
published in the aleph and other stories
[1970]) that he was "in flagrant contradiction"
of his "chosen authorities]," the truth is that he
followed the authorities fairly closely for all the
characters herein portrayed except that of billy
the kid. he did, of course, "change and distort"
the stories to suit his own purposes, but none is
so cut from whole cloth as that of this
gunfighter of the wild west. the lesson in the
"autobiographical essay" is perhaps that jlb's
predilection for the red herring was lifelong. 
notes to fictions("the garden of
forking paths" and "artifices"), pp. 65-
128; 129-180.
p. 65: title: first published as ficciones
(1935-1944) by editorial sur in 1944, this book
was made up of two volumes: el jardín de
senderosque sebifurcan ("the garden of
forking paths"), which had originally been
published in 1941-1942, and
artificios("artifices"), dated 1944 and never
before published as a book. each volume in the
1944 edition had its own title page and its own
preface. (in that edition, and in all successive
editions, the garden of forking paths included
the story "el acercamientoa al-motasim" (the
approach to al-mu'tasim"), collected first in
historia de laeternidad ("history of eternity"),
1936, and reprinted in each successive edition
of that volume until 1953; this story now
appears in the obras completas in historia de
la eternidad, but it is included here as a
"fiction" rather than an "essay") in 1956 emecé
published a volume titled ficciones, which was
identical to the 1944 editorial sur edition 
except for the inclusion in artifices of three new
stories ("the end," "the cult of the phoenix,"
and "the south") and a "postscript" to the 1944
preface to artifices. it is this edition of
fictions, plus "the approach to al-mu'tasim,"
that is translated for this book.
the garden of forking paths
foreword
p. 67: the eight stories: the eighth story,
here printed as the second, "the approach to
al-mu'tasim," was included in all editions
subsequent to the 1941-1942 original edition. it
had originally been published (1936) in
historia de la eternidad ("a history of
eternity"). ordinals and cardinals used in the
foreword have been adjusted to reflect the
presence of this story.
p. 67:sur:"[t]he most influential literary
publication in latin america" (rodriguez
monegal, p. 233), it was started by victoria
acampo, with the aid of the argentine novelist
eduardo malica and the american novelist
waldo frank. borges was one of the journal's 
first contributors, certainly one of its most
notable (though sur published or discussed
virtually every major poet, writer, and essayist
of the new or old world) and he acted for three
decades as one of its "guardian angels." many of
jlb's fictions, some of his poetry, and many
critical essays and reviews appeared for the first
time in the pages of sur.
tlön, uqbar, orbis tertius
p. 68: ramos mejia: "a part of buenos aires
in which the rich had weekend houses
containing an english colony. it is now an
industrial suburb" (hughes and fishburn).
p. 68: bioy casares: adolfo bioy casares
(1914-1999): argentine novelist, jlb's closest
friend and collaborator with jlb on numerous
projects, including some signed with joint
pseudonyms. in their joint productions, the two
men were interested in detective stories,
innovative narrative techniques (as the text
here hints), and tales of a some-what "fantastic"
nature. unfortunately rather eclipsed by
borges, especially in the english-speaking 
world, bioy casares is a major literary figure
with a distinguished body of work; a description
of the reciprocal influence of the two writers
would require (at least) its own book-length
study.
p. 69: volume xlvi: the obras completas,
on which this translation is based, has "volume
xxvi," which the translator takes to be a
typographical error, the second x slipped in for
the correct l
p. 70: johannes valentinus andrea in the
writings of thomas de quincey: it is perhaps
significant that de quincey credits andrea
(1586-1654) with "inventing" the rosicrucian
order by writing satirical works (and one
especially: fama fraternitatis of the
meritorious order of the rosy cross,
addressed to the learned in general and the
governors of europe) describing an absurd
mystico-christian secret society engaged not
only in general beneficence and the
improvement of mankind but also in alchemy
and gold making. the public did not perceive
andrea's satirical intent, and many rushed to
"join" this society, though they could never find
anyone to admit them. at last, according to de
quincey, a group of "paracelsists" decided that
if nobody else would admit to being a
rosicrucian, they would take over the name and
"be" the society.
p. 70: carlos mastronardi: mastronardi
(1901-1976) was "a poet, essayist, and journalist
[in buenos aires], a member of the group of
writers identified with the avant-garde literary
magazine martín fierro" (fishburn and
hughes).
balderston (the literary universe of jlb:
an index... [new york: greenwood press],
1986) gives some of his titles: luzde provincia,
tierra amanecida, conocimiento de la noche.
mastronardi was one of jlb's closest friends
throughout the thirties and forties (borges too
was closely associated with martín fierro), and
rodríguez monegal reported in his biography of
jlb that borges was still seeing mastronardi as
the biography (pubi.1978) was written; it seems
safe to say, therefore, that borges and
mastronardi were friends until mastronardi's 
death.
p. 71: capangas: overseers or foremen of
gangs of workers, usually either slaves or
indentured semi-slaves, in rural areas, for
cutting timber, etc., though not on ranches,
where the foreman is known as a capataz. this
word is of guaraníor perhaps african origin and
came into spanish, as jlb indicates, from the
area of brazil.
p. 72:néstoribarra:(b. 1908) "born in
france of an argentine father who was the son
of a french basque émigré, monegal went to
the university of buenos aires around 1925 to
complete his graduate education. while [there]
he discovered borges' poems and ... tried to
persuade his teachers to let him write a thesis
on borges' ultraist poetry" (rodríguez monegal,
p. 239). ibarra's groundbreaking and very
important study of jlb, borges et borges, and
his translations of jlb (along with those of
roger caillois) into french in the 1950’s were
instrumental in the worldwide recognition of
jlb's greatness. among the other telling
associations with this and other stories is the 
fact that ibarra and borges invented a new
language ("with surrealist or ultraist touches"),
a new french school of literature, identism, "in
which objects were always compared to
themselves," and a new review, tided papers for
the suppression of reality (see "pierre
menard," in this volume; this information,
rodriguez monegal, pp. 240-241). the n.r.f.
is the nouvelle revue française, an extremely
important french literary magazine that
published virtually every important modern
writer in the first three decades of this century.
p. 72: ezequie lmartínez estrada: martinez
estrada (1895-1964) was an influential
argentine writer whose work radiografia de la
pampa (x-ray of the pampa) jlb re-viewed
very favorably in 1933 in the literary
supplement (revista multicolorde los sábados
["saturday motley review"] ) to the buenos
aires newspaper crítica.
p. 72:drieu la rochelle: pierre-eugene
drieu la rochelle(1893-1945) was for a time
the editor of the nouvelle revue française; he
visited argentina in 1933, recognized jlb's
genius, and is reported to have said on his
return to france that "borges vaut le voyage"
(físhburn and hughes).
p. 72: alfonso reyes: reyes (1889-1959) was
a mexican poet and essayist, ambassador to
buenos aires (1927-1930 and again 1936—
1937), and friend of jlb's (fishburn and
hughes). reyes is recognized as one of the great
humanists of the americas in the twentieth
century, an immensely cultured man who was a
master of the spanish language and its style
("direct and succinct without being thin or
prosaic" [rodriquez monegal]).
p. 7y xul solar: xul solar is the nom de
plume-turned-name of alejandro schultz
(1887-1963), a lifelong friend of jlb, who
compared him favorably with william blake.
xul was a painter and something of a "creative
linguist," having invented a language he called
creol: a "language ... made up of spanish
enriched by neologisms and by monosyllabic
english words... used as adverbs" (roberto
alifano, interviewer and editor, twenty-four
conversations with borges, trans. nicome des
suárez araúz, willis barnstone, and noemi
escandell [housatonic, mass.: lascaux
publishers, 1984], p. 119). in another place, jlb
also notes another language invented by xul
solar: "a philosophical language after the
manner of john wilkins" ("autobiographical
essay," p. 237: the aleph and other stories:
1933-1969 [new york: dutton, 1970], pp. 203-
260). jlb goes on to note that "xul was his
version of schultz and solar of solari." xul
solar's painting has often been compared with
that of paul klee; "strange" and "mysterious"
are adjectives often applied to it.
xul illustrated three of jlb's books: el
tamaño de mi esperanza (1926), el idioma de
los argentinos (1928),and un modelo para la
muerte, the collaboration between jlb and
adolfo bioy casares that was signed "b. suárez
lynch."
in his biography of borges, emir rodríguez
monegal devotes several pages to xul's
influence on jlb's writing; borges himself also
talks at length about xul in the anthology of
interviews noted above. xul was, above all, a
"character" in the buenos aires of the twenties
and thirties and beyond.
notes to the fictions 535
p. 80: amorim: enrique amorim (1900-
1960) was a uruguayan novelist, related to
borges by marriage. he wrote about the
pampas and the gaucho (and gaucho life);
borges thought his el paisano aguilar"a closer
description of gaucho life than gùiraldes' more
famous don segundo sombra" (fishburn and
hughes).
pierre menard, author of the quixote
p. 93: local color in maurice barres or
rodríguez larreta: barres (1862-1923) was a
"french writer whose works include a text on
bull-fighting entitled du sang, de la volupté et
de la mort" (fishburn and hughes);one can see
what the narrator is getting at in terms of
romanticizing the foreign. enrique rodriguez
larreta (1875-1961) wrote historical novels;
one, set in avila and toledo in the time of philip
ii (hence the reference to that name in the text) 
and titled la gloria de don ramiro, used an
archaic spanish for the dialogue; clearly this
suggests the archaism of menard's quixote.
(here i paraphrase fishburn and hughes.)
a survey of the works of herbert quain
p. 108: the siamese twin mystery: a novel
by ellery queen, published in 1933. here the
literary critic-narrator is lamenting the fact that
quain's novel was overshadowed by the much
more popular queen's.
artifices
funes, his memory
p. 131: title: this story has generally
appeared under the title "funes the
memorious," and it must be the brave (or
foolhardy) translator who dares change such an
odd and memorable title. nor would the
translator note (and attempt to justify) his
choice of a translation except in unusual
circumstances. here, however, the title in the
original spanish calls for some explanation. the 
title is "funes el memorioso"; the word
memorioso is not an odd spanish word; it is in
fact perfectly common, if somewhat colloquial.
it simply means "having a wonderful or
powerful memory," what in english one might
render by the expression "having a memory like
an elephant." the beauty of the spanish is that
the entire long phrase is compressed into a
single word, a single adjective, used in the
original title as an epithet: funes the elephantmemoried.
(the reader can see that that
translation won't do.) the word "memorisi" is
perhaps the closest thing that common english
yields up without inventing a new word such as
"memorious," which strikes the current
translator as vaguely lewis carroll-esque, yet
"memorisi" has something vaguely show
business about it, as though funes worked
vaudeville or the carnival sideshows. the
french tide of this story is the lovely
eighteenth-century-sounding "funes ou la
mémoire"; with a nod to jlb's great admirer
john barth, i have chosen "funes, his
memory." 
p. 131: the banda oriental: the "eastern
bank" of the river plate, the old name of
uruguay before it became a country, and a
name used for many years afterward by the
"old-timers" or as a sort of nickname.
p. 131: pedro leandro ipuche: the
uruguayan ipuche was a friend of the young
ultraist-period borges (ca.1925), with whom
(along with ricardo guiraldes, author of the
important novel don segundo sombra) he
worked on the literary magazine proa
(fishburn and hughes). proa was an influential
little magazine, and borges and friends took it
seriously; they were engaged, as rodriguez
monegal quotes the "autobiographical essay"
as saying, in "renewing both prose and poetry."
p. 131: fray bentos:" a small town on the
banks of the uruguay river, famous for its
meat-canning industry. in his youth borges was
a regular visitor to his cousins' ranch near fray
bentos"(fishburn and hughes). haedo was in
fact the family name of these cousins.
p. 135: the thirty-three uruguayan
patriots: the "thirty-three," as they were
called, were a band of determined patriots
under the leadership of juan antonio la valleja
who crossed the river plate from buenos aires
to montevideo in order to "liberate" the banda
oriental (uruguay) from the spaniards. their
feat of bravery, under impossible odds,
immortalized them in the mythology of the
southern cone. for fuller detail, see the note to
p. 474, for the story "avelino arredondo" in the
volume the book of sand.
three versions of judas
p. 165(note): euclides da cunha: cunha
(1866-1909) was a very well-known brazilian
writer whose most famous novel is a fictional
retelling of an uprising in the state of bahia. he
was moved by the spiritualism (fishburn and
hughes note its mystical qualities) of the rebels.
p. 165 (note): antonio conselheiro:(1828-
1897). conselheiro was "a brazilian religious
dissident who led a rebellion in canudos, in the
northern state of bahía. the rebels were
peasants... who lived in a system of communes,
working out their own salvation. they rose
against the changes introduced by the new
republican government, which they regarded
as the antichrist.... conselheiro's head was cut
off and put on public display" (fishburn and
hughes). his real name was antonio maciel;
conselheiro means "counselor," and so his
messianic, ministerial role is here emphasized.
p. 165 (note): almafuerte: the pseudonym of
pedro bonifacio palacio (1854-1917), one of
argentina's most beloved poets. a kind of role
model and hero to young writers, akin to the
phenomenon of dylan thomas in britain and
the united states a few years ago, almafuerte
was one of jlb's most admired contemporaries.
the end
p. 169: "it'd been longer than seven years
that i'd gone without seeing my children. i
found them that day, and i wouldn't have it
so's i looked to them like a man on his way to a
knife fight": it is not these words that need
noting, but an "intertextual event." it is about
here that the argentine reader will probably
realize what this story is about: it is a retelling
of the end of josé hernández' famous tale
martín fierro. as fierro is a knife fighter, and
as a black man figures in the poem, and as there
is a famous song contest, the reader will put two
and two together, no doubt, even before martin
fierro's name is mentioned a few lines farther
on. this is the way fishburn and hughes state
the situation: "the episode alluded to in 'the
end' is the payada, or song contest, between
martín fierro and el moreno ["the black man"]
who was the brother of the murdered negro. in
the contest the gauchos discuss metaphysical
themes, but towards the end el moreno reveals
his identity, and his desire for revenge is made
clear.
in keeping with the more conciliatory tone of
pt. 2 [of hernandez' original poem] a fight is
prevented between the two contestants, each
going his own way. "the end" is a gloss on this
episode, the fight that might have taken place."
by this late in the volume, jlb's preface to the
stories, hinting at the coexistence of a "famous
book" in this story, may have dimmed in the
reader's memory, but for the latin american
reader, the creeping familiarity of the events,
like the echoes of shakespeare in the
assassination of kilpatrick in "theme of the
traitor and the hero," should come into the
foreground in this section of the story, and the
reader, like ryan in that other story, make the
"connection."
the south
p. 174: buenos aires: here the province, not
the city. the reference is to the northern border,
near entre ríos and santa fe provinces, on the
paraná river.
p. 174: catriel: cipriano catriel (d. 1874).
catriel was an indian chieftain who fought
against the argentines in the indian wars.
later, however, he fought on the side of the
revolutionary forces (fishburn and hughes).
p. 178: his gaucho trousers: this is the
chiripá, a triangular worsted shawl tied about
the waist with the third point pulled up between
the legs and looped into a knot to form a
rudimentary pant, or a sort of diaper. it is worn
over a pair of pantaloons (ordinarily white) that 
"stick out" underneath. sometimes, incredible
as it strikes anglo-saxons that the
extraordinarily machista gauchos would wear
such clothing (but think of the scots' kilts), the
pantaloons had lace bottoms.
notes to the aleph, pp. 181-288
the dead man
p. 196: rio grande do sul: the
southernmost state of brazil, bordering both
argentina and uruguay on the north.
later in this story, a certain wildness is
attributed to this region; jlb often employed
the implicit contrast between the more
"civilized" city and province of buenos aires
(and all of argentina) and the less "developed"
city of montevideo and nation of uruguay and
its "wilderness of horse country," the "plains,"
"the interior," here represented by rio grande
do sul.
p. 196: paso de lmolino:" a lower-to-middleclass
district outside montevideo" (fishburn
and hughes). 
story of the warrior and the captive maiden
p. 210: the auracan or pampas tongue: the
pampas indians were a nomadic people who
inhabited the plains of the southern cone at the
time of the conquest; they were overrun by the
araucans, and the languages and cultures
merged; today the two names are essentially
synonymous (fishburn and hughes). english
seems not to have taken the name pampas for
anything but the plains of argentina.
p. 211:pulpería: a country store or general
store, though not the same sort of corner
grocery-store-and-bar, the esquina or almacén,
that borges uses as a setting in the stories that
take place in the city. the pulpería would have
been precisely the sort of frontier general store
that one sees in american westerns.
a biography of tadeo isidoro cruz
(1829-1874)
p. 212:montoneros: montoneros were the
men of guerrilla militias (generally gauchos)
that fought in the civil wars following the wars
of independence. they tended to rally under the 
banner of a leader rather than specifically under
the banner of a cause; fishburn and hughes put
it in the following way: "[t]heir allegiance to
their leader was personal and direct, and they
were largely indifferent to his political
leanings."
p. 212: lavalle: juan galo lavalle (1797-
1841) was an argentine hero who fought on the
side of the unitarians, the centralizing buenos
aires forces, against the federalist montoneros
of the outlying provinces and territories, whose
most famous leader was juan manuel de rosas,
the fierce dictator who appears in several of
jlb's stories. the mention here of lavalle and
lópez would indeed locate this story in 1829, a
few months before lavalle was defeated by the
combined rosas and lópez forces (fishburn
and hughes). one would assume, then, that the
man who fathered tadeo isidoro cruz was
fighting with rosas' forces themselves.
p. 212:suárez' cavalry: probably manuel
isidoro suárez (1759-1843), jlb's mother's
maternal grandfather, who fought on the side of
the unitarians in the period leading up to 1829 
(fishburn and hughes).borges may have picked
up the protagonist's name, as well, in part from
his forebear.
p. 213: thirty christian men... sgt. ma.
eusebia laprida... two hundred indians:
eusebio laprida (1829-1898) led eighty, not
thirty, men against a regular army unit of two
hundred soldiers, not indians, in a combat at
the cardoso marshes on january 25, not 23,
1856 (data, fishburn and hughes). the defeat
of the indians took place during a raid in 1879.
jlb here may be conflating the famous thirtythree
led by lavalleja against montevideo (see
note to "avelino arredondo" in the book of
sand), laprida's equally heroic exploit against
a larger "official" army unit, and laprida's
exploit against the indians two decades later.
p. 214: manuel mesa executed in the plaza
de la victoria: manuel mesa (1788-1829)
fought on the side of rosas and the federalists.
in 1829 he organized a force of montoneros and
friendly indians and battled lavalle, losing that
engagement. in his retreat, he was met by
manuel isidoro suárez and captured. suárez
sent him to buenos aires, where he was
executed in the plaza victoria.
p. 214: the deserter martín fierro: as jlb
tells the reader in the afterword to this volume,
this story has been a retelling, from the
"unexpected" point of view of a secondary
character, of the famous gaucho epic poem
martín fierro, by josé hernández. since this
work is a classic (or the classic) of nineteenthcentury
argentine literature, every reader in the
southern cone would recognize "what was
coming": martin fierro, the put-upon gaucho
hero, stands his ground against the authorities,
and his friend abandons his uniform to stand
and fight with him. this changing sides is a
recurrent motif in borges; see "story of the
warrior and the captive maiden" in this
volume, for instance. it seems to have been
more interesting to jlb that one might change
sides than that one would exhibit the usual
traits of heroism. borges is also fond of
rewriting classics: see "the house of asterion,"
also in this volume, and note that the narrator
in "the zahir" retells to himself, more or less as 
the outline of a story he is writing, the story of
the gold of the nibelungen. one could expand
the list to great length.
emma zunz
p. 215:bagé: a city in southern rio grande
do sul province, in brazil.
p. 215: gualeguay: "a rural town and
department in the province of entre ríos"
(fishburn and hughes).
p. 215: lanús:" a town and middle-class
district in greater buenos aires, south-west of
the city" (fishburn and hughes).
p. 217:almagro: a lower-middle-class
neighborhood near the center of buenos aires.
p. 217:calle liniers: as the story says, a
street in the almagro neighborhood.
p. 217: paseo de julio: now the avenida
alem. this street runs parallel with the
waterfront; at the time of this story it was lined
with tenement houses and houses of ill repute.
p. 218: a westbound lacroze: the lacroze
tramway line served the northwestern area of
buenos aires at the time; today the city has an 
extensive subway system.
p. 218: warnes: a street in central buenos
aires near the commercial district of villa
crespo, where the mill is apparently located.
the other death
p. 223: gualeguaychú: "a town on the river
of the same name in the province of entre ríos,
opposite the town of fray bentos, with which
there is considerable interchange" (fishburn
and hughes).
p. 223: masoller: masoller, in northern
uruguay, was the site of a decisive battle on
september ï, 1904, between the rebel forces of
aparicio saravia (see below) and the national
army; saravia was defeated and mortally
wounded (fishburn and hughes).
p. 223: the banners of aparicio saravia:
aparicio saravia (1856-1904) was a uruguayan
landowner and caudillo who led the successful
blanco (white party) revolt against the
dictatorship of idiarte borda (the colorados, or
red party). even in victory, however, saravia
had to continue to fight against the central
government, since borda's successor, batlle,
refused to allow saravia's party to form part of
the new government. it is the years of this latter
revolt that are the time of "the other death."
see also, for a longer explanation of the political
situation of the time, the story "avelino
arredondo" in the book of sand.
p. 223: rio negro or paysandú: río negro is
the name of a department in western uruguay
on the river of the same name, just opposite the
argentine province of entre ríos. paysandú is a
department in uruguay bordering rio negro.
once again jlb is signaling the relative
"wildness" of uruguay is comparison with
argentina, which was not touched by these civil
wars at the time.
p. 223: gualeguay: see note to p. 215 above.
note the distinction between "gualeguay" and
"gualeguaychú" (see note to p. 223 above).
p. 223: ñancay: "a tributary of the uruguay
river that flows through the rich agricultural
lands of southern entre ríos province"
(fishburn and hughes).
p. 224: men whose throats were slashed
through to the spine: this is another instance
in which jlb documents the (to us today)
barbaric custom by the armies of the south
american wars of independence (and other,
lesser combats as well) of slitting defeated
troops' throats. in other places, he notes
offhandedly that "no prisoners were taken,"
which does not mean that all the defeated
troops were allowed to return to their bivouacs.
in this case, a rare case, borges actually
"editorializes" a bit: "a civil war that struck me
as more some outlaw's dream than the collision
of two armies."
p. 224: ilkscas, tupambae, masoller: all
these are the sites of battles in northern and
central uruguay fought in 1904 between
saravia's forces and the national army of
uruguay.
p. 224: white ribbon: because the troops
were often irregulars, or recruited from the
gauchos or farmhands of the argentine, and
therefore lacking standardized uniforms, the
only way to tell friend from enemy was by these
ribbons, white in the case of the blancos, red in 
the case of the colorados. here the white ribbon
worn by the character marks him as a follower
of saravia, the leader of the whites. (see notes
passim about the significance of these parties.)
p. 224: zumacos: the name by which regulars
in the uruguayan national army were known.
p. 225: artiguismo: that is, in accord with
the life and views of josé gervasio artigas
(1764-1850), a uruguayan hero who fought
against both the spaniards and the nascent
argentines to forge a separate nation out of
what had just been the banda oriental, or east
bank of the plate. the argument was that
uruguay had its own "spirit," its own "sense of
place," which the effete argentines of buenos
aires, who only romanticized the gaucho but
had none of their own, could never truly
understand or live.
p. 225: red infantry: the reds, or
colorados, were the forces of the official
national government of uruguay, in
contradistinction to the blancos, or whites, of
saravia's forces; the reds therefore had
generally better weapons and equipment, and
better-trained military officers on the whole,
than the irregular and largely gaucho whites.
p. 225:¡viva urquiza!: justo josé urquiza
(1801-1870) was president of the argentinian
confederation between 1854 and 1860. prior to
that, he had fought with the federalists under
rosas (the provincial forces) against the
unitarians (the buenos aires-based centralizing
forces), but in 1845 he broke with rosas (whom
jlb always excoriates as a vicious dictator) and
eventually saw buenos aires province and the
other provinces of the argentinian
confederation brought together into the
modern nation of argentina, though under the
presidency of bartolomé mitre.
p. 225: cagancha or india muerta: the
perplexity here derives from the fact that while
the battle at masoller, in which damián took
part, occurred in 1904, the cry ¡viva urquiza!
would have been heard at the battle of
cagancha (1839) or india muerta (1845), where
urquiza's rebel federalist forces fought the
unitarians. at cagancha, urquiza was defeated
by the unitarians; at india muerta he defeated 
them. this story may also, thus, have certain
subterranean connections with "the
theologians," in its examination of the
possibilities of repeating or circular, or at least
non-discrete, time.
p. 227: he "marked" no one: he left his
mark on no man in a knife fight; in a fight,
when the slight might, even by the standards of
the day, be deemed too inconsequential to kill a
man for, or if the other man refused to fight, the
winner would leave his mark, a scar, that would
settle the score.
averroës' search
p. 239: "the seven sleepers of ephesus":
this is a very peculiar story to put in the minds
of these islamic luminaries, for the story of the
seven sleepers of ephesus is a christian story,
told by gregory of tours. clearly the breadth of
culture of these gentlemen is great, but it is
difficult (at least for this translator) to see the
relationship of this particular tale (unlike the
other "stories," such as the children playing or
"representing" life and the "if it had been a
snake it would have bitten him" story told by
abu-al-hasan) to averroës' quest.
the zahir
p. 243: calk aráoz: fishburn and hughes
tell us that in the 1930’s, calle aráoz was "a
street of small houses inhabited by the
impoverished middle class"; it is near the
penitentiary las heras.
p. 244: on the corner of chile and tacuari:
a corner in the barrio sur, or southern part of
buenos aires, as the story says; it is some ten
blocks from the plaza constitución and its great
station.
p. 244:truco: a card game indigenous,
apparently, to argentina and played very often
in these establishments. borges was fascinated
by this game and devoted an essay and two or
three poems to it, along with references, such as
this one, scattered through-out his œuvre. the
phrase "to my misfortune" indicates the
inexorability of the attraction that the game
held for him; the narrator could apparently
simply not avoid going to the bar. truco's 
nature, for jlb, is that combination of fate and
chance that seems to rule over human life as
well as over games: an infinitude of possibilities
within a limited number of cards, the
limitations of the rules. see "truco" in borges:
a reader.
p. 244:la concepción: a large church in the
barrio sur, near the plaza constitución.
p. 244: the chamfered curb in darkness:
here jlb's reference is to an ochava—that is, a
"corner with the corner cut off" to form a threesided,
almost round curb, and a somewhat
wider eight-sided rather than four-sided
intersection, as the four corners of the
intersection would all be chamfered in that way.
this reference adds to the "old-fashioned"
atmosphere of the story, because chamfered
corners were common on streets traveled by
large horse-drawn wagons, which would need
extra space to turn the corners so that their
wheels would not ride up onto the sidewalks.
p. 245: i went neither to the basilica del
pilar that morning nor to the cemetery: that
is, the narrator did not go to teodelina's
funeral. the basilica del pilaris one of the most
impressive churches in central buenos aires,
near the recoleta cemetery where teodelina
vilar would surely have been buried.
p. 248: "she's been put into bosch": bosch
was "a well-known private clinic frequented by
the porteño elite" (fishburn and hughes).
the writing of the god
p. 253: / saw the origins told by the book of
the people. i saw... the dogs that tore at their
faces: here the priest is remembering the story
of the creation of the world told in the popul
vuh, the mayan sacred text. the standard
modern translation is by dennis tedlock: popul
vuh: the mayan book of the dawn of life
(new york: simon & schuster touchstone,
1985). for this part of the genesis story, cf.
pp.84-85.
the wait
p. 267: plaza del once: pronounced óhn-say,
not wunce. this is actually "plaza once," but
the homonymy of the english and spanish
words makes it advisable, the translator thinks,
to modify the name slightly in order to alert the
english reader to the spanish ("eleven"), rather
than the english ("onetime" or "past"), sense of
the word. plaza once is one of buenos aires'
oldest squares, "associated in borges' memory
with horse-drawn carts" (fishburn and
hughes), though later simply a modern square.
the aleph
p. 275: quilines: a district in southern
buenos aires; "at one time favoured for
weekend villas, particularly by the british,
quilmes has since become unfashionable, a
heavily industrialised area, known mainly for
quilmes beer, the largest brewing company in
the world" (fishburn and hughes). thus jlb is
evoking a world of privilege and luxury.
p. 276: juan crisóstomo laflnur library:
this library is named after jlb's great-uncle
(1797-1824), who occupied the chair of
philosophy at the colegio de la unión del
suduntil, under attack for teaching materialism,
he was forced into exile. 
p. 278: "the most elevated heights of
flores": here daneri's absurdity reaches "new
heights," for though the neighborhood of flores
had been very much in vogue among the
affluent of buenos aires society during the
nineteenth century, it was only about a hundred
feet above sea level. moreover, it had lost much
of its exclusiveness, and therefore glamour, by
the time of this story, since in the yellow fever
epidemic of 1871 people fled "central" buenos
aires for the "outlying" neighborhood.
p. 283:chacarita: one of the two enormous
cemeteries in buenos aires; the other is
recoleta. a modern guidebook* has this to say
about the cemeteries of buenos aires:
life and death in recoleta & chacarita
death is an equalizer, except in buenos
aires. when the arteries harden after decades
of dining at au bec fin and finishing up with
coffee and dessert at la bielaor café de la paix
,the wealthy and powerful of buenos aires move
ceremoniously across the street to recoleta
cemetery, joining their forefathers in a place
they have visited religiously all their lives---
according to argentine novelist tomás eloy
martínez, argentines are "cadaver cultists" who
honor their most revered national figures not
on the date of their birth but of their death....
nowhere is this obsession with mortality and
corruption more evident than in recoleta,
where generations of the elite repose in the
grandeur of ostentatious mausoleums. it is a
common saying and only a slight exaggeration
that "it is cheaper to live extravagantly all your
life than to be buried in recoleta.
"traditionally, money is not enough: you must
have a surname like anchorena, alvear,
aramburu, avellaneda, mitre, martínez de hoz,
or sarmiento....
although more democratic in conception,
chacaritahas many tombs which match the
finest in recoleta. one of the most visited
belongs to carlos gardel, the famous tango
singer. (argentina, uruguayé-paraguay,
wayne bernhardson and maria massolo,
hawthorne, vic, australia; berkeley, ca, usa;
and london, uk: lonely planet publications
[travel survival kit], 1992)
p. 285: compendia of dr. acevedo díaz:
eduardo acevedo díaz (1882-1959) won the
premio nacional for his novel cancha larga;
jlb's entry that year, the garden of forking
paths, won second prize.
p. 285: pedro henriquez ureña: henriquez
ureña (1884-1946), originally from the
dominican republic, lived for years in buenos
aires and was an early contributor to sur, the
magazine that victoria ocampo founded and
that jlb assiduously worked on. it was through
henriquez ureña, who had lived for a time in
mexico city, that jlb met another close friend,
the mexican humanist alfonso reyes.
henriquez ureña and jlb collaborated on the
antología de la literatura argentina (1937).
notes to the maker, pp. 289-328
foreword
p. 291:leopoldo lugones: lugones (1874-
1938) was probably argentina's leading poet in
the second to fourth decades of this century; he 
was influenced by spanish modernismo and by
the french symbolists. to a degree he
represented to the young turks of argentine
poetry the ancien régime; therefore he was
often attacked, and often tastelessly so. early
on, jlb joined in these gibes at lugones,
though clearly borges also recognized lugones'
skills and talents as a poet. rodriguez monegal
(pp. 197-198) speculates that jlb had mixed
feelings about lugones, especially in his person,
but suggests that respect for lugones as a poet
no doubt prevailed, especially as jlb matured.
monegal quotes borges (quoted by fernández
moreno) as follows: lugones was "a solitary
and dogmatic man, a man who did not open up
easily.... conversation was difficult with him
because he [would] bring everything to a close
with a phrase which was literally a period....
then you had to begin again, to find another
subject.... and that subject was also dissolved
with a period.... his kind of conversation was
brilliant but tiresome. and many times his
assertions had nothing to do with what he really
believed; he just had to say something
extraordinary.... what he wanted was to control
the conversation. everything he said was final.
and... we had a great respect for him."
(fernández moreno [1967], pp. 10-11, in
rodriguez monegal, p. 197; ellipses in
rodriguez monegal.) another problem with
lugones was his partiality to military
governments, his proto- and then unfeigned
fascism; obviously this did not endear him to
many, more liberal, thinkers. in this
introduction jlb seems to recognize that while
he and his friends were experimenting with a
"new" poetics in the first decades of the century,
lugones kept on his amiable way, and to admit
that later he, jlb, had put aside some of the
more shocking and radical of his notions of
poetry in favor of a cleaner, less "poetic" poetry,
which lugones would probably have recognized
as much closer to his own. so the "son" comes
to see that he has come to resemble the
resented "father" (no freudian implications
intended; genetics only; no political
implications intended, either; borges hated
military governments and hated fascism and
nazism).
p. 292: the maker: the spanish title of this
"heterogeneous" volume of prose and poetry
(only the prose is included in this volume) is el
hacedor, and hacedor is a troublesome word
for a translator into english. jlb seems to be
thinking of the greek word poeta, which means
"maker," since a "true and literal" translation of
poeta into spanish would indeed be hacedor.
yet hacedor is in this translator's view, and in
the view of all those native speakers he has
consulted, a most uncommon word. it is not
used in spanish for "poet" but instead makes
one think of someone who makes things with
his hands, a kind of artisan, perhaps, or
perhaps even a tinkerer. the english word
maker is perhaps strange too, yet it exists;
however, it is used in english (in such phrases
as "he went to meet his maker" and the brand
name maker's mark) in a way that dissuades
one from seizing upon it immediately as the
"perfect" translation for hacedor.
(the spanish word hacedor would never be
used for "god," for instance.) eliot weinberger 
has suggested to this translator, quite rightly,
perhaps, that jlb had in mind the scots word
makir, which means "poet." but there are other
cases: eliot's dedication of the waste land to
ezra pound, taken from dante— il miglior
fabbro, where fabbro has exactly the same
range as hacedor. several considerations seem
to militate in favor of the translation "artificer":
first, the sense of someone's making something
with his hands, or perhaps "sculptor," for one of
jlb's favorite metaphors for poetry was at one
time sculpture; second, the fact that the second
"volume" in the volume fictions is clearly titled
artifices-, third, the overlap between art and
craft or artisanry that is implied in the word, as
in the first story in this volume. but a
translational decision of this kind is never easy
and perhaps never "done"; one wishes one
could call the volume ii fabbro, or poeta, or
leave it el hacedor. the previous english
translation of this volume in fact opted for
dreamtigers. yet sometimes a translator is
spared this anguish (if he or she finds the key to
the puzzle in time to forestall it); in this case
there is an easy solution. i quote from emir
rodriguez monegal's jorge luis borges: a
literary biography, p. 438:"borges was sixty
when the ninth volume of his complete works
came out-----for the new book he had thought
up the title in english: the maker, and had
translated it into spanish as el hacedor, but
when the book came out in the united states
the american translator preferred to avoid the
theological implications and used instead the
tide of one of the pieces: dreamtigers" and so a
translation problem becomes a problem created
in the first place by a translation! (thanks to
eliot weinberger for coming across this
reference in time and bringing it to my
attention.)
dreamtigers
p. 294: title: the title of this story appears
in italics because jlb used the english nonce
word in the spanish original.
p. 294: that spotted "tiger": while there are
many indigenous words for the predatory cats
of south america—puma, jaguar, etc.—that 
have been adopted into spanish, peninsular
spanish called these cats tigers. (one should
recall that columbus simply had no words for
the myriad new things in this new world, so if
an indigenous word did not "catch on"
immediately, one was left with a european
word for the thing: hence "indians"!) here,
then, jlb is comparing the so-called tiger of the
southern cone with its asian counterpart,
always a more intriguing animal for him. cf.,
for instance, "blue tigers" in the volume titled
shakespeare's memory.
toenails
p. 296:recoleta: the "necropolis" near the
center of buenos aires, where the elite of
porteño society buries its dead.
see also note to "the aleph" in the aleph.
covered mirrors
p. 297: federalists/unitarians: the
federalists were those nineteenth-century
conservatives who favored a federal (i.e.,
decentralized) plan of government for
argentina, with the provinces having great
autonomy and an equal say in the government;
the federalists were also "argentine," as
opposed to the internationalist, europe-looking
unitarians, and their leaders tended to be
populist caudillos, their fighters in the civil wars
to be gauchos. the unitarians, on the other
hand, were a buenos aires-based party that was
in favor of a centralizing, liberal government;
they tended to be "free-thinkers," rather than
catholics per se, intellectuals, internationalists,
and europophile in outlook unitarians
deplored the barbarity of the gaucho ethos, and
especially sentimentalizing that way of life; they
were urban to a fault.
this old "discord between their lineages," as
borges puts it in this story, is the discord of
argentina, never truly overcome in the
argentina that jlb lived in.
p. 297: balvanera: one can assume that at
the time "borges" had this experience,
balvanera was a neighborhood of "genteel
poverty" much as one might envision it from
the description of "julia," but in the story "the 
dead man," in the aleph, balvanera is the
neighborhood that the "sad sort of hoodlum"
benjamín otálora comes from, and it is
described as a district on the outskirts of the
buenos aires of 1891 (which does not,
emphatically, mean that it would be on the
outskirts of the buenos aires of 1927, the time
of the beginning of "covered mirrors"), a
neighborhood of "cart drivers and leather
braiders." thus balvanera is associated not so
much with gauchos and cattle (though the
federalist connection hints at such a
connotation) as with the stockyards and their
industries, the secondary (and romantically
inferior) spin-offs of the pampas life. balvanera
here, like julia's family itself, is the decayed
shadow of itself and the life it once represented.
p. 297: blank wall of the railway
yard...parque centenario: the railway ran
(and runs) through balvanera from the plaza
del once station westward, out toward the
outskirts of buenos aires. sarmiento runs
westward, too, but slightly north of the railway
line, and running slightly northwest. it meets
the parque centenario about a mile and a half
from the station.
the mountebank
p. 301: chaco river: in the litoral region of
northern argentina, an area known for cattle
raising and forestry.
delia elena san marco
p. 303: plaza del once (pronounced óhn-say,
not wunce). this is actually usually given as
plaza once, but the homonymy of the english
and spanish words makes it advisable, i think,
to modify the name slightly so as to alert the
english reader to the spanish ("eleven"), rather
than english ("onetime" or "past"), sense of the
word. jlb himself uses "plaza del once" from
time to time, as in the obras completas, vol. ii,
p.428, in the story "la señora mayor," in
informe de brodie ("the elderly lady," in
brodie's report, p. 375). plaza once is one of
buenos aires' oldest squares, "associated in
borges' memory with horse-drawn carts"
(fishburn and hughes), though later simply a 
modern square, and now the site of buenos
aires' main train station for west-bound
railways.
a dialog between dead men
p. 304: quiroga: like many of the pieces in
this volume ("the captive," "martin fierro"
"everything and nothing"), "a dialog between
dead men" sets up a "dialog" with others of
borges' writings, especially a famous poem
called "general quiroga rides to his death in a
carriage" ("el general quirogava en coche al
muere [sic, for "a sumuerte, a lamuerte,"
etc.]"). there the reader will find the scene that
is not described but only alluded to here, the
murder of general quiroga by a sword-wielding
gang of horsemen under the leadership of the
reinafe brothers. some biographical
information is essential here: juan facundo
quiroga (1793-1835) was a federalist caudillo
(which means that he was on the side of rosas
[see below]), and was, like rosas, a leader
feared by all and hated by his opponents; he
was known for his violence, cruelty, and
ruthlessness and made sure that his name was
feared by slitting the throats of the prisoners
that his forces captured and of the wounded in
the battles that he fought. so great was his
charisma, and so ruthless his personality, that
his supposed ally in the fight against the
unitarians, juan manuel de rosas, began to
resent (and perhaps suspect) him. as quiroga
was leaving a meeting with rosas in 1835, he
was ambushed by the reinafe gang, and he and
his companions were brutally murdered, their
bodies hacked to pieces; it was widely believed
(though stubbornly denied by rosas) that rosas
had ordered the assassination.
p. 304: rosas: juan manuel de rosas (1793-
1877) was the dictator of argentina for eighteen
years, from 1835 to 1852.
his dictatorship was marked by terror and
persecution, and he is for jlb one of the most
hated figures in argentine history; jlb's forebears,
unitarians, suffered the outrages of
rosas and his followers. early in his career
rosas was a federalist (later the distinction
became meaningless, as rosas did more than
anyone to unify argentina, though most say he
did so for all the wrong reasons), a caudillo
whose followers were gangs of gaucho sand his
own private vigilante force, the so-called
mazorca (see the story "pedro salvadores" in in
praise of darkness). he methodically
persecuted, tortured, and killed off his
opponents both outside and in-side his party,
until he at last reigned supreme over the entire
country. see the poem "rosas" in jlb's early
volume of poetry fervorde buenos aires.
p. 305: "chacabuco and junin and palma
redondo and caseros": battles in the wars of
independence of the countries of the southern
cone.
the yellow rose
p. 310: porpora de' giardin, pompa de'
prato, i gemma dì primavera, occhio d'aprile...
: these lines are from a poem, l'adone, written
by marino (1569-1625) himself (iii:i58,11.1-2).
martín fierro
p. 312:ituzaingóor ayacucho: battles (1827 
and 1824 respectively) in the wars of
independence against spain.
p. 312: peaches... a young boy... the heads of
unitarians, their beards bloody: this terrible
image captures the cruelty and horror of the
civil war that racked argentina in the early
nineteenth century, and the brutality with
which the federalists, when they were in power
under rosas, persecuted and terrorized the
unitarians. in other stories the translator has
noted that slitting throats was the preferred
method of dispatching captured opponents and
the wounded of battles; here the opponents are
decapitated. making this all the more horrific is
the fact that it was jlb's maternal grandfather,
isidoro acevedo, who as a child witnessed this
scene. in jlb: selected poems 1923-1967
(harmondsworth: penguin, 1985), p. 316, the
editor quotes borges (without further citation):
"one day, at the age of nine or ten, he [isidoro
acevedo] walked by the plata market. it was in
the time of rosas. two gaucho teamsters were
hawking peaches. he lifted the canvas covering
the fruit, and there were the decapitated heads 
of unitarians, with blood-stained beards and
wide-open eyes. he ran home, climbed up into
the grapevine growing in the back patio, and it
was only later that night that he could bring
himself to tell what he had seen in the morning.
in time, he was to see many things during the
civil wars, but none ever left so deep an
impression on him."
p. 312: a man who knew all the words...
metaphors of metal... the shapes of its moon:
this is probably leopoldo lugones. see the
note, above, to the foreword to the maker, p.
291.
paradiso, xxxi, 108
p. 316: "my lord jesus chris ... is this,
indeed, thy likeness in such fashion
wrought?": borges is translating dante,
paradiso, xxxi: 108-109; in english, the lines
read as given. quoted from the portable dante,
ed. paolo milano, paradiso, trans. laurence
binyon (1869-1943) (new york: penguin, 1975
[orig. copyright, 1947]), p. 532. 
everything and nothing
p. 319: title: in italics here because the story
was titled originally in this way by jlb, in
english.
ragnarök
p. 321: pedro henríquez ureña: henríquez
ureña (1884-1946), originally from the
dominican republic, lived for years in buenos
aires and was an early contributor to sur, the
magazine dial victoria ocampo founded and
that jlb assiduously worked on. it was through
henríquez ureña, who had lived for a time in
mexico city, that jlb met another friend, the
mexican humanist alfonso reyes. henríquez
ureña and jlb collaborated on the antología
de la literature argentina (1937), and they were
very close friends.
in memoriam, j.f.k.
p. 326: avelino arredondo: the assassin, as
the story says, of the president of uruguay,
juan idiarte borda(1844-1897).
see the story "avelino arredondo" in the
volume the book of sand.
notes to in praise of darkness, pp. 329-
342
foreword
p. 332: ascasubi: hilario ascasubi (1807-
1875) was a prolific, if not always successful,
writer of gaucho poetry and prose.
(the diccionario oxford de literatura
espanola e hispano-americana gives several
tides of little magazines begun by ascasubi that
didn't last beyond the first number.) he was a
fervid opponent of the rosas regime and was
jailed for his opposition, escaping in 1832 to
uruguay. there and in paris he produced most
of his work.
pedro salvadores
p. 336: a dictator: juan manuel de rosas
(1793-1877). in borges, rosas is variously called
"the tyrant" and "the dictator"; as leader of the
federalist party he ruled argentina under an
iron hand for almost two decades, from 1835 to 
1852. thus the "vast shadow," which cast its
pall especially over the mostly urban, mostly
professional (and generally landowning)
members of the unitarian party, such as, here,
pedro salvadores. rosas confiscated lands and
property belonging to the unitarians in order to
finance his campaigns and systematically
harassed and even assassinated unitarian party
members.
p. 336: battle of monte caseros: at this
battle, in 1852, rosas was defeated by forces
commanded by justo josé urquiza, and his
tyranny ended.
p. 336: unitarian party: the unitarian party
was a buenos aires-based party whose leaders
tended to be european-educated liberals who
wished to unite argentina's several regions and
economies (the argentinian confederation) into
a single nation and wished also to unite that
new argentine economy with europe's, through
expanded exports: hence the party's name. the
party's color was sky blue; thus the detail, later
in the story, of the "sky blue china" in pedro
alvadores' house. 
p. 336: they lived ... on calle suipacha, not
far from the corner of temple: thus, in what
was at this time a northern suburb of buenos
aires about a mile north of the plaza de mayo.
this area, later to become the barrio norte, was
clearly respectable but not yet fashionable (as it
was to become after the yellow fever outbreak of
1871 frightened the upper classes out of the area
south of the plaza de mayoup into the more
northern district).
p. 336: the tyrant's posse: the mazorca(or
"corn cob," so called to stress its agrarian rather
than urban roots), rosas' private army, or
secret police. the mazorca was beyond the
control of the populace, the army, or any other
institution, and it systematically terrorized
argentina during the rosas years.
p. 337: smashed all the sky blue china: the
color of the china used in the house is the color
symbolizing the unitarian party (see above,
note to p. 336) and denounces salvadores as a
follower.
notes to brodie's report, pp. 343-408
foreword
p. 345: "in the house of suddhoo": borges
often drops hints as to where one might look to
find clues not only to the story or essay in
question but also to other stories or essays; he
gives signposts to his own "intertextuality." in
this case, the reader who looks at this kipling
story will find that there is a character in it
named bhagwan dass; the name, and to a
degree the character, reappear in "blue tigers,"
in the volume shakespeare's memory.
p. 345: hormiga negra: "the black ant," a
gaucho bandit. borges includes a note on
hormiga negrain his essay on martín fierro:
"during the last years of the nineteenth century,
guillermo hoyo, better known as the 'black
ant,' a bandit from the department of san
nicolás, fought (according to the testimony of
eduardo gutiérrez) with bolos [stones tied to
the ends of rope] and knife" (obras completas
en colaboración [buenos aires: emecé, 1979],
p. 546, trans. a.h.).
p. 345: rosas: juan manuel de rosas (1793-
1877), tyrannical ruler of argentina from 1835
to 1852, was in many ways a typical latin
american caudillo. he was the leader of the
federalist party and allied himself with the
gauchos against the "city slickers" of buenos
aires, whom he harassed and even murdered
once he came to power. other appearances of
rosas may be found in "pedro salvadores" (in
praise of darkness) and "the elderly lady" (in
this volume).
p. 346: and i prefer...here the obras
completas seems to have a textual error; the
text reads apto (adjective: "germane, apt,
appropriate") when logic would dictate opto
(verb: "i prefer, i choose, i opt.").
p. 346: hugo ramirez moroni: jlb was
fond of putting real people's names into his
fictions; of course, he also put "just names" into
his fictions. but into his forewords?
nevertheless, the translator has not been able
to discover who this person, if person he be,
was.
p. 347: the golden-pink coat of a certain
horse famous in our literature: the reference is 
to the gauchesco poem "fausto" by estanislao
del campo, which was fiercely criticized by paul
groussac, among others, though praised by
calixto oyuela ("never charitable with
gauchesco writers," in jlb's own words) and
others. the color of the hero's horse (it was an
overo rosado) came in for a great deal of attack;
rafael hernández, for instance, said such a
color had never been found in a fast horse; it
would be, he said, "like finding a three-colored
cat." lugones also said this color would be
found only on a horse suited for farm work or
running chores. (this information from jlb,
"la poesía gauchesca," discusión [1932].)
the interloper
p. 348:2 reyes 1:26: this citation
corresponds to what in most english bibles is
the second book of samuel (2 samuel); the first
chapter of the "second book of kings" has only
eighteen verses, as the reader will note. in the
new catholic bible, however, 1 and 2 samuel
are indexed in the table of contents as 1 and 2
kings, with the king james's 1 and 2 kings
bumped to 3 and 4 kings. though the
translator's spanish-language bible uses the
same divisions as the king james, one
presumes that jlb was working from a
"catholic bible" in spanish. in a conversation
with norman thomas digiovanni, borges
insisted that this was a "prettier" name than
"samuel," so this text respects that sentiment.
the text in question reads: "i am distressed for
thee, my brother: very pleasant hast thou been
unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing
the love of women." (see daniel balderston,
"the 'fecal dialectic': homosexual panic and
the origin of writing in borges," in
¿entiendes?: queer readings, hispanic
writings, ed. emiliel. bergmann and paul
julian smith [durham: duke university press,
1995]. pp- 29-45, for an intriguing reading of
this story and others.)
p. 349: those two criollos: there is no good
word or short phrase for the spanish word
criollo. it is a word that indicates race, and so
class; it always indicates a white-skinned
person (and therefore presumed to be
"superior") born in the new world colonies,
and generally, though not always, to parents of
spanish descent (another putative mark of
superiority). here, however, clearly that last
characteristic does not apply. jlb is saying with
this word that the genetic or cultural roots of
these men lie in europe, and that their family's
blood has apparently not mixed with black or
indian blood, and that they are fully naturalized
as new worlders and argentines. the implicit
reference to class (which an argentine would
immediately understand) is openly ironic.
p. 349: costa brava: "a small town in the
district of ramallo, a province of buenos aires,
not to be confused with the island of the same
name in the paraná river, scene of various
battles, including a naval defeat of garibaldi"
(fishburn and hughes). bravo/a means
"tough, mean, angry," etc.; in spanish,
therefore, borges can say the toughs gave costa
brava its name, while in translation one can
only say they gave the town its reputation. 
unworthy
p. 353: the maldonado: the maldonado was
a stream that formed the northern boundary of
the city of buenos aires at the turn of the
century; the neighborhood around it, palermo,
was known as a rough part of town, and jlb
makes reference to it repeatedly in his work.
see the story "juan murafia," p. 370, for
example. thus, fischbein and his family lived
on the tough outskirts of the city. see also
mention of this area on p. 359, below.
p. 354:1 had started calling myself santiago
but there was nothing i could do about the
fischbein: the terrible thing here, which most
spanish-language readers would immediately
perceive, is that the little red-headed jewish
boy has given himself a saint's name: santiago
is "saint james," and as st. james is the patron
saint of spain, santiago matamoros, st. james
the moor slayer. the boy's perhaps unwitting
self-hatred and clearly conscious attempt to "fit
in" are implicitly but most efficiently
communicated by jlb in these few words.
p- 355- juan moreira: a gaucho turned 
outlaw (1819-1874) who was famous during his
lifetime and legendary after death. like jesse
james and billy the kid in the united states, he
was seen as a kind of folk hero, handy with (in
moreira's case) a knife, and hunted down and
killed by a corrupt police. like the u.s. outlaws,
his fictionalized life, by eduardo gutiérrez, was
published serially in a widely read magazine, la
patria argentina, and then dramatized, most
famously by josé de podestà. see below, in note
to "the encounter," p. 368).
p. 355: little sheeny: fishburn and hughes
gloss this nickname (in spanish el rusito,
literally "little russian") as being a "slang term
for ashkenazi jews ... (as opposed to
immigrants from the middle east, who were
known as turcos, 'turks')." an earlier english
translation gave this, therefore, as "sheeny,"
and i follow that solution. the slang used in
buenos aires for ethnic groups was (and is) of
course different from that of the englishspeaking
world, which leads to a barber of
italian extraction being called, strange to our
ears, a gringo in the original spanish version of 
the story "juan muraña" in this volume.
p. 355: calle junín: in buenos aires,
running from the plaza del once to the
prosperous northern district of the city; during
the early years of the century, a stretch of junín
near the center of the city was the brothel
district.
p. 356:lunfardo: for an explanation of this
supposed "thieves' jargon," see the foreword to
this volume, p. 347.
the story from rosendo juárez
p. 358: the corner of bolivar and
venezuela: now in the center of the city, near
the plaza de mayo, and about two blocks from
the national library, where borges was the
director. thus the narrator ("borges") is
entering a place he would probably have been
known to frequent (in "guayaquil," the narrator
says that "everyone knows" that he lives on
calle chile, which also is but a block or so
distant); the impression the man gives, of
having been sitting at the table a good while,
reinforces the impression that he'd been
waiting for "borges." but this area, some six
blocks south of rivadavia, the street "where the
southside began," also marks more or less the
northern boundary of the neighborhood known
as san telmo, where rosendo juárez says he
himself lives.
p. 358: his neck scarf: here rosendo juárez
is wearing the tough guy's equivalent of a tie,
the chalina, a scarf worn much like an ascot,
doubled over, the jacket buttoned up tight to
make a large "bloom" under the chin. this garb
marks a certain "type" of character.
p. 358: "you've put the story in a novel":
here "the man sitting at the table," rosendo
juárez, is referring to what was once perhaps
jlb's most famous story, "man on pink
corner," in a universal history of iniquity,
q.v., though he calls it a novel rather than a
story.
p. 359: neighborhood of the maldonado:
the maldonado was the creek marking the
northern boundary of the city of buenos aires
around the turn of the century; rosendo juárez
"words about the creek are true and mark the 
story as being told many years after the fact.
the neighborhood itself would have been
palermo.
p. 360:callecabrera: in palermo, a street in
a rough neighborhood not far from the center of
the city.
p. 360: a kid in black that wrote poems:
probably evaristo carriego, jlb's neighbor in
palermo who was the first to make poetry about
the "riffraff "—the knife fighters and petty
toughs—of the slums. jlb wrote a volume of
essays dedicated to carriego.
p. 361:moreira: see note to "unworthy," p.
355.
p. 362:chacarita: one of the city's two large
cemeteries; la recoleta was where the elite
buried their dead, so chacarita was the
graveyard of the "commoners."
p. 363: san telmo: one of the city's oldest
districts, it was a famously rough neighborhood
by the time of the story's telling. fishburn and
hughes associate it with a popular song that
boasts of its "fighting spirit" and note that the
song would have given "an ironic twist to the
last sentence of the story."
the encounter
p. 365:lunfardo: for an explanation of this
supposed "thieves' jargon," see the foreword to
this volume, p. 347.
p. 365: one of those houses on calle junín:
see note to "unworthy," p. 355.
p. 365:moreira: see note to "unworthy," p.
355.
p. 365:martín fierro and don segundo
sombra: unlike the real-life juan moreira,
martín fierro and don segundo sombra were
fictional gauchos. martín fierro is the hero of
the famous poem of the same name by josé
hernández; the poem is centrally important in
argentine literature and often figures in jlb's
work, as a reference, as a subject of meditation
in essays, or rewritten (in "the end," in the
volume fictions, q.v.); his headstrong bravery
and antiauthoritarianism are perhaps the traits
that were most approved by the "cult of the
gaucho" to which jlb alludes here. don
segundo sombrais the protagonist of a novel by
ricardo gúiraldes; for this novel, see the note,
below, to "the gospel according to mark," p.
399. it is interesting that jlb notes that the
model for the gaucho shifts from a real-life
person to fictional characters, perhaps to
indicate that the true gaucho has faded from the
argentine scene and that (in a common borges
trope) all that's left is the memory of the
gaucho.
p. 368: the podestás and the gutierrezes:
the podestà family were circus actors; in 1884,
some ten years after the outlaw gaucho juan
moreira's death, juan de podestà put on a
pantomime version of the life of moreira. "two
years later," fishburn and hughes tell us, "he
added extracts from the novel [by eduardo
gutiérrez] to his performance." the plays were
extraordinarily successful. eduardo gutiérrez
was a prolific and relatively successful, if none
too "literary," novelist whose potboilers were
published serially in various argentine
magazines. his juan moreira, however,
brought himself and moreira great fame, and
(in the words of the diccionario oxford de 
literatura española e hisfano-americana)”
created the stereotype of the heroic gaucho.
"the dictionary goes on to say that" borges
claims that gutiérrez is much superior to
fenimore cooper."
juan muraña
p. 370: palermo: a district in buenos aires,
populated originally by the italians who
immigrated to argentina in the nineteenth
century. trapani's name marks him as a
"native" of that quarter, while borges and his
family moved there probably in search of a less
expensive place to live than the central district
where they had been living; borges always
mentioned the "shabby genteel" people who
lived in that "shabby genteel" neighborhood
(rodriguez monegal, pp. 48-55).
p. 371:juan muraña: as noted in "the
encounter," at one point juan moreira was the
very model of the gaucho and therefore of a
certain kind of swaggering masculinity; juan
muraña's name so closely resembles moreira's
that one suspects that jlb is trading on it to
create the shade that so literarily haunts this
story. in the dream, especially, muraña has the
look of the gaucho: dressed all in black, with
long hair and mustache, etc. nor, one suspects,
is it pure coincidence that the story "juan
muraña" immediately follows the story in which
juan moreira's ghost plays such a large part.
p. 371: around the time of the centennial:
the centennial of the argentine declaration of
independence, signed 1810, so the story takes
place around 1910.
p. 371: a man named luchessi: luchessi's
name marks him too as a "native" of palermo,
though he has now moved into a district in
southern buenos aires, near the bustling (if
"somewhat dilapidated" [fishburn and
hughes]) plaza de la constitución and its
railway station.
p. 371: barracas: fishburn and hughes
gloss this as a "working-class district in
southern buenos aires near la boca and
constitución [see note just above] and
bordering the riachuelo."
p. 371: wop: see note to "little sheeny," p. 
355, above. in spanish, gringo was the word
used to refer to italian immigrants; see a note
on the translation.
p. 372: calle thames: in palermo.
the elderly lady
p. 375: wars of independence: for the
independence not only of argentina but of the
entire continent. during this period there were
many famous generals and leaders, many
named in the first pages of this story. thus
rubio is associated with the grand forces of
continental self-determination that battled in
the second and third decades of the nineteenth
century.
p. 375: chacabuco, cancha rayada, maipú,
arequipa: chacabuco (chile,1817): the army of
the andes under general josé san martín
fought the spanish royalist forces under
general marcò del pont and won. cancha
rayada (chile, march 1818): san martin's army
was defeated by the royalists and independence
was now very uncertain. maipú (chile, april
1818): san martin's army decisively defeated
the royalist forces and secured the
independence of chile. arequipa (peru, 1825):
general antonio josé de sucre, leading
bolivar's army, accepted spain's surrender of
the city after a siege; this, after the battle of
ayacucho (see below), meant the full
independence of peru.
p. 375: he and josé de olavarría exchanged
swords: olavarría (1801-1845) was an
argentine military leader who fought at the
battles just mentioned and perhaps at the great
battle of ayacucho, which determined the full
independence of peru. exchanging swords was
a "romantic custom among generals, and
borges recalls that his own grandfather had
exchanged swords with gen. mansilla on the
eve of a battle" (fishburn and hughes).
olavarría and lavalle (see below) are probably
the models for rubio.
p. 375: the famous battle of cerro alto
...cerro bermejo: however famous this battle
may be, i confess i have not been able to locate
it. i hope (for the good name of the humble
research that has gone into these notes) that
this is an example of borges' famous put-ons
(see a note on the translation). i feel that it
may well be; this is the bird's-eye statement
given in the penguin history of latin america
(edwin williamson, new york/london:
penguin, 1992), p. 228, of the years 1823-1824
as they apply to bolivar (who is mentioned as
winning this battle): "arriving in peru in
september 1823, bolivar began to prepare for
the final offensive against the royalists. by the
middle of 1824 he launched his campaign,
winning an important battle at junin, which
opened to him the road to lima, the ultimate
prize. in december, while bolivar was in lima,
marshal sucre defeated viceroy de la serna's
army at the battle of ayacucho.
spanish power in america had been
decisively broken and the indies were at last
free." thus, it appears that in april of 1823
bolivar was planning battles, not fighting them.
if it is a real battle, i ask a kind reader to inform
me of the date and location so that future
editions, should there be any, may profit from
the knowledge. 
p. 375: ayacucho: in peru between lima and
cuzco (1824). here sucre's peruvian forces
decisively defeated the spanish royalists.
p- 375-' ituzaingó: in the province of
corrientes (1827). here the argentine and
uruguayan forces defeated the brazilians.
p. 375: carlos maria alvear: alvear(1789-
1852) had led the argentine revolutionary
forces against the spanish forces in montevideo
in 1814 and defeated them. when he conspired
against the unitarian government, however, he
was forced into exile in uruguay, but was
recalled from exile to lead the republican army
of argentina against the brazilians. he defeated
the brazilians at ituzaingó, ending the war. he
was a diplomat for the rosas government.
p. 375: rosas: juan manuel de rosas (1793-
1877), tyrannical ruler of argentina from 1835
to 1852. see note to foreword, p. 345.
p. 375: rubio was a lavalleman: juan galo
lavalle (1797-1841), chosen to lead the
unitarians against the federalists under rosas,
whom lavalle defeated in 1828. lavalle was
defeated in turn by rosas in 1829; then "after
ten years in montevideo he returned to lead the
unitarians in another attempt to oust rosas"
(fishburn and hughes). thus he spent his life
defending the policies and the principles of the
buenos aires political party against those of the
gaucho party headed by rosas.
p. 375: the montonero insurgents: these
were gaucho guerrillas who fought under their
local caudillo against the buenos aires-based
unitarian forces. while it is claimed that they
would have had no particular political leanings,
just a sense of resistance to the centralizing
tendencies of the unitarians, the effect would
have been that they were in alliance with the
federalists, led by rosas, etc.
p. 376: oribe's white army: the white
party, or blancos, was "a uruguayan political
party founded by the followers of oribe,...
[consisting] of rich landowners who supported
the federalist policy of rosas in buenos aires…
the blancos are now known as the nationalists
and represent the conservative classes"
(fishburn and hughes). manuel oribe (1792-
1856) was a hero of the wars of independence 
and fought against the brazilian invasion of
uruguay. he served as minister of war and the
navy under rivera; then, seeking the presidency
for himself, he sought the support of rosas.
together they attacked montevideo in a siege
that lasted eight days. (this information,
fishburn and hughes). see also note to p. 386,
"battle of manantiales," in the story "the other
duel."
p. 375.- the tyrant: rosas (see various notes
above).
p. 376: pavón and cepeda: cepeda
(argentina, 1859) and pavón (argentina, 1861)
were battles between the confederation forces
under urquiza and the buenos aires-based
porteño forces (basically unitarian) under
mitre, fought to determine whether buenos
aires would join the argentine confederation or
would retain its autonomy.
buenos aires lost at cepeda but won at
pavón, enabling mitre to renegotiate the terms
of association between the two entities, with
more favorable conditions for buenos aires.
p. 375.- yellow fever epidemic: 1870-1871. 
p. 375.- married ... one saavedra, who was
a clerk in the ministry of finance: fishburn
and hughes tell us that "employment in the
ministry of finance is considered prestigious,
and consistent with the status of a member of
an old and well-established family." they tie
"saavedra" to cornelio de saavedra, a leader in
the first criollo government of argentina, in
1810, having deposed the spanish viceroy. this
is a name, then, that would have had
resonances among the argentines similar to a
jefferson, adams, or marshall among the
americans, even if the person were not directly
mentioned as being associated with one of the
founding families. "saavedra" will also
invariably remind the spanish-language reader
of miguel de cervantes, whose second
(maternal) surname was saavedra.
p. 377: she still abominated artigas, rosas,
and urquiza: rosas has appeared in these
notes several times. here he is the archenemy
not only of the buenos aires unitarians but of
the family as well, because he has confiscated
their property and condemned them to "shabby 
gentility," as borges would have put it. josé
gervasio artigas (1764-1850) fought against the
spaniards for the liberation of the americas but
was allied with the gauchos and the federalist
party against the unitarians; in 1815 he
defeated the buenos aires forces but was later
himself defeated by help from brazil .justo josé
urquiza (1801-1870) was president of the
argentinian confederation from 1854 to 1860,
having long supported the federalists (and
rosas) against the unitarians. as a military
leader he often fought against the unitarians,
and often defeated them. in addition, he was
governor (and caudillo) of entre ríos province.
p. 377: easterners instead of uruguayans:
before uruguay became a country in 1828, it
was a spanish colony which, because it lay east
of the uruguay river, was called the banda
oriental ("eastern shore"). (the uruguay meets
the paraná to create the huge estuary system
called the río de la plata, or river plate;
montevideo is on the eastern bank of this river,
buenos aires on the west.) la banda oriental
is an old-fashioned name for the country, then, 
and orientales ("easterners") is the equally oldfashioned
name for those who live or were born
there. only the truly "elderly" have a right to
use this word.
p. 377: plaza del once: pronounced óhn-say,
not wunce. this is generally called plaza once,
but the homonymy of the english and spanish
words make it advisable, the translator thinks,
to modify the name slightly in order to alert the
english reader to the spanish ("eleven"), rather
than english ("onetime" or "past"), sense of the
word. plaza once is one of buenos aires' oldest
squares, "associated in borges' memory with
horse-drawn carts" (fishburn and hughes),
though later simply a modern square.
p. 377: barracas: once a district virtually in
the country, inhabited by the city's elite, now a
"working-class district" in southern buenos
aires, near the plaza constitución (fishburn
and hughes).
p. 379: sra. figueroa's car and driver.
perhaps the clara glencairn de figueroa of the
next story in this volume, "the duel"; certainly
the social sphere in which these two sras.
figueroa move is the same.
p. 380: benzoin: probably used, much as we
use aromatic preparations today, to clear the
nasal passages and give a certain air of health to
the elderly. an aromatic preparation called
alcoholado (alcohol and bay leaves, basically) is
much used in latin america as a kind of cureall
for headaches and various aches and pains and
for "re-freshing" the head and skin; one
presumes this "benzoin" was used similarly.
p. 380: one of rosas' posses: the mazorca
("corncob," so called [or so folk etymology has
it] for the federalist party's agrarian ties), a
private secret police force-cum-army employed
by rosas to intimidate and terrorize the
unitarians after his rise to federalist power.
the mazorcas beat and murdered many people,
and so the elderly lady is right to have been
shocked and frightened. (see also the story
"pedro salvadores" in in praise of darkness.)
the duel
p. 381: clara glencairn de figueroa: clara's
name is given here as christian name +
patronymic or family (father's) name + de
indicating "belonging to" or, less patriarchally,
"married to" + the husband's last name. this
indication of a character by full name, including
married name, underscores clara's equivocal
position in life and in the world of art that she
aspires to: a woman of some (limited) talent in
her own right, with a "career" or at least a
calling in which she is entitled to personal
respect, versus the "wife of the ambassador."
this tension is noted a couple of pages later,
when "mrs." figueroa, having won a prize, now
wants to return to cartagena "in her own right,"
not as the ambassador's wife that she had been
when she had lived there before. it is hard for
the english reader, with our different system of
naming, to perceive the subtleties of jlb's use
of the conventions of naming in hispanic
cultures.
p. 382: juan crisóstomo lafinur: lafinur
(1797-1824), a great-uncle of borges', was the
holder of the chair of philosophy "at the newlyformed
colegio de la unión del sud" (fishburn
and hughes) and thus a "personage."
p. 382: colonel pascual pringles: pringles
(1795-1831) was a distinguished unitarian
military leader from the province of san luis.
"[rather than surrender his sword to the
enemy" in defeat, fishburn and hughes tell us,
"he broke it and threw himself into the river."
p. 382: the solid works of certain
nineteenth-century genoese bricklayers: this
snide comment refers to the italian immigrant
laborers and construction foremen who built
those "old houses of buenos aires" that marta
paints; she is influenced, that is, not by an
italian school of painting (which would be
acceptable, as "european" was good; see the
first line of the next paragraph in the text) but
by italian immigrant (and therefore, in buenos
aires society hierarchy, "undesirable" or
"inferior") artisans. note in "the elderly lady"
the narrator's mild bigotry in the statement that
one of the daughters married a "sr. molinari,
who though of italian surname was a professor
of latin and a very well-educated man." the
social lines between the old criollo families
(descendants of european, especially spanish,
colonists), the newer immigrant families, those 
with black or indian blood, etc. were clear,
especially in the nineteenth century and the
early years of the twentieth.
p. 384: mrs. figueroa: here, clear in the
spanish, though difficult to convey in the
english, the judge slights clara glencairn de
figueroa by referring to her by her married
name (figueroa's wife) rather than by her
"personal" and "professional" name, clara
glencairn. she is looked down on, as the story
subtly shows, for her social standing, which is
in contrast to the vie bohème that she would
like to think she had lived and the reputation as
a painter she would like to think she had earned
for herself. note "clara glencairn" throughout
the paragraph on p. 383, for the more
"professional" or "personally respectful" mode
of naming, and note the way the story swings
between the two modes as one or another of
clara's "statuses" is being emphasized.
the other duel
p. 386:adrogué: in the early years of the
century, a town south of buenos aires (now
simply a suburb or enclave of the city) where
borges and his family often spent vacations; a
place of great nostalgia for borges.
p. 386: battle of manantiales: in uruguay.
for many years (ca. i837-ca. 1886) uruguay
was torn by rivalry and armed conflicts between
the blancos (the conservative white party) led
by, among others, manuel oribe and timoteo
aparicio (see below), and the colorados (the
more liberal red party) led by venancio flores
and lorenzo baiile. manantiales (1871) marked
the defeat of aparicio's blancos by the
colorados under batlle. once cardoso and
silveira are seen joining up with aparicio's
forces, this understated sentence tells the
argentine or uruguayan reader (or any other
latin american reader familiar, through little
more than high school history classes, with the
history of the southern cone—these dates and
places are the very stuff of latin american
history) that their end was fated to be bloody.
p. 386:cerro largo: a frontier area in
northeast uruguay, near the brazilian border.
aparicio had to recruit from all over the
countryside, as he was faced by the triple
alliance of brazil, argentina, and the
uruguayan colorado government.
p. 387: thirty-three: this in homage to the
tiny band of thirty-three soldiers who in 1825
crossed the uruguay river along with juan
antonio lavalleja and manuel oribe in order to
galvanize the uruguayans to rise up against the
brazilians who at that time governed them. the
flag of the uruguayan rebellion against brazil
carried the motto libertad o muerte ("liberty
or death"). thus silveira asserts himself as a
tough, independent, and yet "patriotic" gaucho.
p. 387: aparicio's revolution: see the note to
p. 386, above.
p. 387: montoneros: the montoneros were
gaucho (blanco, or white, party) forces,
something like quasi-independent armies,
organized under local leaders to fight the
unitarians (the colorados ,or red party) during
the civil wars that followed the wars of
independence.
p. 387: white badges: to identify them with
the blancos, as opposed to the colorados (red 
party). the armies would have been somewhat
ragtag groups, so these badges (or sometimes
hatbands) would have been virtually the only
way to distinguish ally from enemy in the
pitched battles of the civil war.
p. 388: cut anybody's throat: here and in
many other places in borges, the slashing of
opponents' throats is presented in the most
matter-of-fact way. it was a custom of armies
on the move not to take prisoners; what would
they do with them? so as a matter of course,
and following the logic of this type of warfare
(however "barbaric" it may seem to us today),
losers of battles were summarily executed in
this way.
guayaquil
p. 390: guayaquil: the name of this city in
ecuador would evoke for the latin american
reader one of the most momentous turns in the
wars of independence, since it was here that
generals simón bolívar and josé san martín
met to decide on a strategy for the final
expulsion of the spaniards from peru. after this 
meeting, san martin left his armies under the
command of bolivar, who went on to defeat the
spaniards, but there is no record of what
occurred at the meeting or of the reasons that
led san martin to retire from the command of
his own army and leave the glory of liberation
to bolivar. a long historical controversy has
been waged over the possible reasons, which
the story briefly recounts. clearly, the "contest
of wills" thought by some to have occurred
between the two generals is reflected in the
contest of wills between the two modern
historians. for a fuller (and very
comprehensible) summary of this event and the
historiographic controversy surrounding it, see
daniel balderston, out of context: historical
reference and the representation of reality in
borges (durham, n.c.: duke university press,
1993), pp. 115-131. in this chapter balderston
also discusses borges' equating of history with
fiction, providing us another important way of
reading the story. see also, for a brief historical
summary, the penguin history of latin
america (edwin williams, new york/ london: 
penguin, 1992), pp. 227-228 and passim in that
chapter.
p. 391:gen. josé de san martín: as the note
just above indicates, san martin (1778-1850),
an argentine, was one of the two most
important generals of the wars of
independence, the other being simón bolivar, a
venezuelan. this story is subtly written from
the argentine point of view, because it deals
with the reasons—psychological, perhaps, or
perhaps military, or, indeed, perhaps other—for
which san martin, after winning extraordinary
battles in his own country and in peru (where
he came to be called protector of peru), turned
his entire army over to bolivar so that bolivar
could go on to win the independence of the
continent from spain. the enigma of san
martin is one that absorbed the argentine
historical mind for decades, and perhaps still
does, so any letters that might have even the
slightest, or the most self-serving (if argentines
will forgive me that possible slur on the
general's psyche), explanation for his actions
would be of supreme importance to argentine 
history. this story, then, is filled with those
pulls and tugs between one sort of (or
nationality of) history and another, one sort of
"rationale" and another.
fishburn and hughes note that the masonic
lodge mentioned in the story (p- 395) is the
logia lautaro, of which san martin was indeed
a member. masonic lodges were famed as
centers of progressive, not to say revolutionary,
thought in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. modern freemasonry was founded in
the seventeenth century.
p. 392:calle chile: it is fishburn and
hughes's contention that the physical,
geographical location of this street is not really
important here, though they give that location
as "in the southern part of buenos aires,... some
ten blocks from plaza constitución"; their
interesting view of this street's mention here is,
rather, that it is a symbolic name, linking jlb
(that library he had inhabited [see "juan
muraña" in this volume], the house, and
perhaps some of the objets de la gloire that jlb
had inherited from his grandfather and other
members of his family) with the narrator of
"guayaquil":
"the narrator lives in a street called chile,
borges lived in a street called maipú and both
names are associated in the argentine mind,
since san martin's great victory in chile was the
battle of maipú."
the gospel according to mark
p. 397: baltasar espinosa: the spanish
reader will sooner or later associate the young
man's surname, espinosa ("thorny") with the
christian "crown of thorns" evoked at the end of
this story.
p. 397: ramos mejia: "a part of buenos
aires in which the rich had weekend houses
containing an english colony; now an industrial
suburb" (fishburn and hughes).
p. 399: a couple of chapters of [don
segundo sombra]: the next sentence is
perhaps not altogether opaque, but both its
sense and its humor are clearer if the reader
knows the novel in question. don segundo
sombra deals with the life of a gaucho
(considerably romanticized by nostalgia) and
the customs of life on the pampas. therefore,
gutre père sees nothing in it for him; indeed,
the gauchesco novel was an urban form, a
manifestation perhaps of what marie
antoinette's critics were wont to call nostalgie
de la boue, or so "the gospel according to
mark" would seem to imply. jlb himself makes
reference to this "urban nostalgia" in the story
titled "the duel," above, on p. 384.
brodie's report
p. 404: qzr: the english reader will not,
probably, be able to perceive the fine irony here.
brodie has said that these barbarous people do
not have vowels, so he will call them yahoos. he
then gives a few words in their language. here,
the word for "citadel," qzr, is the spanish word
for citadel, alcázar, with the vowels removed.
but the spanish derives from the arabic, which
does not have vowels; the vowels are sometimes
marked, sometimes not; thus, qzr is a
transliteration of a word that any spanish
speaker would recognize as being fully and
legitimately arabic. thus the yahoos are, or
might be, arabs. here borges' "traveler's satire"
is acute: one can find "barbarism" even in the
most refined and advanced of societies.
notes to the book of sand, pp. 409-486
the other
p. 413: another rosas in 1946, much like our
kinsman in the first one: the second rosas, of
course, is juan domingo perón, the fascist
military leader who in 1945 was asked to resign
all his commissions and retire, and who did so,
only (napoleon-like) to return eight days later
to address huge crowds of people and later, in
1946, to be elected president. all this
information is from rodriguez monegal, who
then adds: "he was argentina's first king" (390-
391).
as for "our kinsman," the details are a bit
blurry, but borges seems to have been related,
on his father's side, to rosas.
fishburn and hughes talk about a "relative
of borges' great-great-grandfather." borges
hated and despised both these men. 
p. 416: "whitman is incapable of falsehood":
daniel balderston believes that he has
identified this poem: "when i heard at the close
of the day," in walt whitman, complete poetry
and collected prose, ed. justin kaplan (new
york: library of america), 1982, pp. 276-277.
the essay in which balderston identifies the
poem referred to by the older "borges" is "the
'fecal dialectic': homosexual panic and the
origin of writing in borges," in ¿entiendes?:
queer readings, hispanic writing, ed.
emiliel. bergmann and paul julian smith
(durham/london: duke university press),
1995, pp. 29-45. while these notes are not
intended to add "scholarly" information to the
text of borges, this remarkable identification,
and the reading that accompanies it, in the
translator's view warrants mention. the old
man/young man motif, the public/private
motif, the issue of "sex in the oeuvre of borges,"
readings of a number of important stories, and,
to a degree, the issue of violence in the
fictions—all of these questions are impacted by 
balderston's contentions in this essay.
the congress
p. 423: the newspaper ultima hora: the
title can be translated in two ways, the
eleventh hour or the latest news, depending
on whether one wishes to give it an apocalyptic
reading or a quotidian one.
p. 424:confiteríadel gas: this pastry shop
(see also the note to p. 446, "café águila," in the
story "the night of the gifts" in this volume, for
a further explanation of this sort of
establishment) is located on alsina between
bolivar and defensa, about two blocks from the
casa de gobierno(or as most porteños know it,
the casa rosada, or pink house), at the river
plate end of the avenue that runs from the casa
de gobierno to the plaza del congreso. i have
not been able to learn where this cafe's curious
name came from, perhaps a gas-company office
in the neighborhood; the problem with
translating it into something such as café gas
is, as the english-language reader will
immediately perceive, the hint of indigestion
that it (the translation and the name) leaves.
nor is it a truck stop. clearly, in locating the
confitería in this neighborhood, jlb is
attempting to associate one "congress" with that
of the institutionalized government in whose
neighborhood it takes up residence. porteños
know this particular confitería as more of a
pastry shop than a café per se; we are told that
the meringues with crème de chantilly are the
house specialty.
p. 426: rancher from the eastern province:
before uruguay became a country, in 1828, it
was a spanish colony which, because it lay east
of the uruguay river, was called the banda
oriental, or "eastern shore." (the uruguay
meets the paraná to create the huge estuary
system called the río de la plata, or river plate;
montevideo is on the eastern bank of this river,
buenos aires on the west.) "la banda oriental"
is an old-fashioned name for the country, then,
and "orientales," or "easterners," is the equally
old-fashioned name for those who live or were
born there. here, the narrator refers to "the
eastern province" because for a very long time 
the shifting status of uruguay— colony and
protectorate of spain, annex of brazil and/or
argentina, etc.—led the nationalistic elements
in buenos aires to consider it an "eastern
province" of argentina. uruguay was founded
on cattle raising.
p. 426:artigas: josé gervasio artigas (1764-
1850), uruguayan, a political and military
leader who opposed first the spaniards and
then the argentines who wished to keep the
banda oriental (the east bank of the river
plate) in fealty to one or another of those
powers. when argentina, instead of supporting
the banda oriental's independence from spain,
asserted spain's authority over the area (in part
to keep the brazilians/ portuguese out), artigas
led a huge exodus of citizens out of montevideo
and "into the wilderness." recognized as a hero
in uruguay, he might not have been so regarded
by a cosmopolite such as glencoe, especially
because of his legendary (but perhaps
exaggerated) bloodthirsty-ness and his
association with "the provinces" rather than
"the city." 
p. 427: wops: "gringo" was the somewhat
pejorative term used for immigrant italians; the
closest english equivalent is "wop." as with all
such designations, the tone of voice with which
it is spoken will determine the level of offense;
it can even be affectionate if spoken
appropriately.
p. 427: calle junin: at this time, a street
lined with brothels, many of which were
relatively tame and in which men might not
only solicit the services of prostitutes but also
have a drink, talk, and generally be "at their
ease."
p. 429: palace of running waters: el
palacio de aguas corrientes is a building in
central buenos aires housing a pumping station
and some offices for the water company; it is an
extravagantly decorated edifice, its walls
covered in elaborate mosaic murals—a building
that one porteño described to this translator as
"hallucinatory" and "absurd." the official name
of this building is the "grand gravitational
repository"; it is, according to buenos aires,
ciudad secreta by germinal nogués (buenos 
aires: editorial ruiz diaz, 2nd éd., pp.244-245),
located on the block bounded by avenida
córdoba and called rio bamba, viamonte, and
ayacucho. it is set—or at least was—on one of
the highest points of the city. the building of
the palace of running waters was begun in
1887, and it is a gigantic jigsaw puzzle designed
by the swedish engineer a. b. nystromer.
all this architectural effort was invested in a
building destined to store 72,700,000 liters of
water per day, which was the amount estimated
to be needed for the daily consumption of the
porteños....
the four walls of this palace ... were capable
of withstanding this pressure without support
except at the center of each side. solid
buttresses were also incorporated into the
design; these were set at intervals between the
corner towers and the central towers, both
inside and outside—vicente blasco ibáñez said
of this edifice: "this 'palace' is not a palace. it
has arcades and grand doors and windows but
it is all a fake. inside, there are no rooms. its
four imposing façades mask the retaining walls 
of the reservoir inside. the builders tried to
beautify it with all this superfluity, so that it
would not offend the aesthetic of the [city's]
central streets."[trans., a.h.]
p. 430: the chiripá... the wide-legged
bombacha: these are articles of the dress of the
gaucho. the chiripá was a triangular worsted
shawl tied about the waist with the third point
pulled up between the legs and looped into the
knot to form a rudimentary pant or a sort of
diaper. it was worn over a pair of pantaloons
(ordinarily white) that "stick out" underneath.
the bombacha is a wide-legged pant that was
worn gathered at the calf or ankle and tucked
into the soft boots, sometimes made of the hide
of a young horse, that the gaucho wore. the
bombacha resembles the pant of the zouave
infantryman.
p. 430: those mournful characters in
hernández or rafael obligado: josé
hernández (1834-1886), author of martín
fierro, a long semi-epic poem celebrating the
gaucho and his life; rafael obligado (1851-
1920), a litterateur who hosted a literary salon 
and founded the academia argentina. obligado
was the author of a very well-known poem
dealing with the life of a payador, or traveling
singer, named santos vega. while the
characters in these poems were portrayed not
without defects, their lives and they themselves
were to a degree romanticized; as ways of life
per se, the gaucho and the payador were part of
the mythology of argentina. borges examines
these ways of life (and the literature that
chronicled them) in many of his essays.
p. 430:calle jujuy near the plaza del once:
at its northern end calle jujuy runs directly
into the plaza del once; on the other (north)
side of the plaza, it has become puerreydon.
thus, in a sense, it begins at rivadavia, where
borges (and apparently all older porteños) said
"the southside began." the "plaza del once"
(pronounced 6hn-say, not wunce) is generally
called "plaza once" in buenos aires, but the
homonymy of the english and spanish words
make it advisable, the translator thinks, to
slightly modify the name in order to alert the
english reader to the spanish ("eleven"), rather 
than english ("onetime" or "past"), sense of the
word. plaza once is one of buenos aires' oldest
squares, "associated in borges' memory with
horse-drawn carts" (fishburn and hughes),
though later simply a modern square.
p. 431: lugones' lunario sentimental:
leopoldo lugones (1874-1938) was one of
argentina's most famous and influential (and
most talented) poets; the lunario sentimental
is a 1909 book of his poetry.
there are more things
p. 437: turdera: a town south of buenos
aires, rustic and apparently at this time
somewhat uninviting (see the story
"the interloper," p. 348, set there). p. 438:
glew: a town near turdera.
the night of the gifts
p. 446:café águila, on calle florida near
the intersection of piedad: here two things
need pointing out: first the café águila, whose
name in spanish is the confitería del águila,
actually existed. the confitería was the
equivalent of a coffeehouse or tearoom, a place
for conversation and taking one's time over
coffee or tea and pastry (or light food) in the
late afternoon and early evening. (one might
think of paris.) the águila was a center for
intellectuals and artists, as this sketch clearly
suggests. second is the location: calle florida
(pronounced flor-ee-da) was, and remains, at
least near the plaza de mayo, one of the most
exclusive streets in downtown buenos aires;
this intersection is just one block from that
square. piedad's name was changed to
bartolomé mitre in 1906; therefore, this story
must take place before that date. if this
"borges," like borges himself, was born in 1899,
he must have been just a young boy overhearing
this conversation, and the "we," in that case,
must be something of a stretch!
p. 449: juan moreira: a gaucho turned
outlaw (1819-1874) who was famous during his
lifetime and legendary after death. like jesse
james and billy the kid in the united states, he
was seen as a kind of folk hero, handy with
weapons (in moreira's case a knife), and hunted
down and killed (as this story shows) by a
corrupt police. that does not mean he was not 
to be feared by all when he was "on a tear," as
this story also shows.
p. 449:podestá's long hair and black beard:
the podestà family were circus actors. in 1884,
some ten years after the outlaw gaucho juan
moreira's death, juan de podestà put on a
pantomime version of the life of moreira.
podestà and the performances were enormously
famous, seen by everyone, and surely colored
perceptions of the real-life story of moreira, as
movies have colored those of jesse james and
billy the kid.
a weary man's utopia
p. 463:bahía blanca: a city in buenos aires
province, south of the city of buenos aires; the
bay of that name as well. thus the "future man"
has either traveled a bit south or the story itself
takes place south of buenos aires.
avelino arredondo
p. 472: the war that was ravaging the
country: this story takes place, as its first
sentence reminds us, in 1897, but one must go 
back some four decades in order to understand
the situation. since the balde of monte caseros
in 1852, in which rosas (whose troops had been
occupying uruguay) had been defeated and
with his defeat uruguay's titular independence
had been won, uruguay had undergone a series
of revolts, uprisings, and power struggles that
left the country reeling. constitutional
democracy was an experiment that seemed
destined to fail. as in argentina, it was the
whites (blancos)against the reds (colorados),
though the parties in uruguay were conceived
somewhat differently from those in argentina;
in some ways, and at the worst of times, they
were simply banners under which generals vied
for power, and alliances among the generals
and among the southern cone nations were by
nature shifting. generally speaking, however,
the blancos were the traditional followers of
manuel oribe; they were conservative, usually
catholic (as opposed to the "free-thinkers" jlb
sometimes mentions), and tended to favor the
rural areas over the cities; thus the party often
was led by provincial, landowning caudillos
whose gaucho followers made up the largest
number of its members. the colorados were the
liberal, urban party, whose roots went back to
the nineteenth-century caudillo fructuoso
rivera; this was the "ruling" party in uruguay
for many years, though one president resigned
saying the uruguayans were an ungovernable
people, and though the whites were constantly
pressuring the reds (sometimes by armed
uprising) for greater representation in the
government. just prior to the time of this story,
the blancos and colorados had come to an
uneasy truce, and the cabinet of conciliation
(ministerio de conciliación) was formed. in
1894 the unlikely (and compromise) colorado
candidate juan idiarte borda was elected
president on the forty-seventh ballot, but in
1897 the uneasy alliance broke down; idiarte
borda was perceived as abusing his power, of
engaging in cronyism and neglecting to respect
the right of the factions that elected him to
enjoy some of the fruits of power, and perhaps
even of rigging the upcoming elections. just at
this time the blancos began a revolt in the
interior, led by the gaucho caudillo aparicio
saravia (see below). idiarte borda apparently
perceived this revolt as directed against himself,
but a faction within the red party perceived it
as a power grab against the entire party, which
idiarte borda could not really be said to
represent; the prominent national figure josé
bauley ordonez gave a call to arms to this
colorado faction, and suddenly idiarte borda
found himself besieged not only by the blancos
but by a large number of his own party as well.
the armed conflicts fought in the interior were
marked by what must seem to us today grisly
and cold-blooded brutality on the part of all
contending sides in the skirmishes and battles
that were fought; one history of uruguay says
that by 1897 there was a general reaction and
outcry against the wholesale slitting of the
throats of "prisoners." see, for instance, the
story "the other duel" in brodie's report,
which, though not dealing specifically with this
conflict, shows the "naturalness" of this practice
to the conflicts of the time.
p. 472: battle of ceños blancos: in the
department of rivera; white chalk hills, with a
creek of the same name at their foot. in 1897 a
body of government troops under general josé
villar met insurrectionist blanco forces led by
aparicio saravia; the "battle" (called that, not
"skirmish," because of the ferocity of the
fighting rather than the number of troops) was
indecisive, but the colorados came out
marginally ahead. no prisoners were taken.
p. 472: aparicio saravia's gang of gauchos:
saravia (1856-1904) was, as fishburn and
hughes tell us, a "landowner and caudillo,
uncultured and politically unsophisticated,
whose magnetic personality secured him a
following among the gauchos of the interior."
saravia and his troops fought on the blanco
side against the government of juan idiarte
borda; saravia had long battled for the blanco
cause against the entrenched colorado
governments.
p. 474: [ traveled] through the bay of la
agraciada where the thirty-three came
ashore, to the hervidero, through ragged
mountains, wildernesses, and rivers, through
the cerro he had scaled to the lighthouse,
thinking that on the two banks of the river
plate there was not another like it. from the
cerroon the bay he traveled once to the peak
on the uruguayan coat of arms: la agraciada
is indeed a bay; the thirty-three were a band of
determined patriots under the leadership of
juan antonio lavelleja. lavelleja, a uruguayan,
was the manager of a meat-salting plant in
buenos aires when the victory at ayacucho
(1824, liberating peru from the spaniards) was
announced; he was so inspired by patriotic zeal
that he gathered his "thirty-three" and they
crossed the river plate to la agraciada bay,
and several years (and many battles fought by
thousands of volunteers) later liberated
uruguay (1829). hervidero was the place of
artigas' encampment when he ruled the five
provinces he had "conquered" and put under
uruguayan rule; this rustic headquarters was
on a tableland in the northwest of uruguay, far
from the "capital" city of montevideo; it showed
his "humility" and symbolized his philosophy of
government. the cerro is the conical hill on a
spit of land opposite montevideo; there is a
fortress on the top, and a lighthouse, and it is
represented in the top right quadrant of the
country's coat of arms. all these references are
the touchstones of uruguayan patriotism;
arredondo dreams of country in its most heroic
manifestations.
p. 475: juan idiarte borda: borda (1844-
1897) was the president of uruguay, elected
under the conditions explained in note to p.
472, above.
p. 476: the events: the people and events of
this story are "true." the real avelino
arredondo was in fact the assassin of the real
juan idiarte borda(1897). an argentine reader
would almost certainly not recognize the name
avelino arredondo, and a uruguayan might or
might not; that is why there is no note
appended to the first appearance of
arredondo's name, in the title, as there is, for
example, to the immediately recognizable name
of the city of guayaquil in the story of that
name in the volume brodie's report. but the
year, the historical events, the tracing of the
legendary "sites" of uruguayan history, and
various other hints at what is about to occur
would certainly have given the reader who
hailed from the southern cone a sense of
familiarity; this story would ring a bell.
certainly borges tried, subtly, though surely, to
plant the seeds of that feeling. in his
"statement," arredondo shows that he is of the
baiile faction of the colorado party, not the
"faction" (made up of cronies) of idiarte borda.
(see note to p. 472, above.)
the book of sand
p. 483: the street the library's on: calle
méxico, the site of the national library, where
borges was director. the street's name is given
in the spanish-language story as a kind of
punch line, but that bang cannot be achieved
for the non-argentine reader by simply naming
the street; thus the explicitation.
notes to shakespeare's memory, pp.
487-515
august 25,1983
p. 490:adrogué: in the early years of the
century, a town south of buenos aires (now
simply a suburb or enclave of the city) where
borges and his family often spent vacations; a
place of great nostalgia for borges.
the rose of paracelsus
p. 504: de quincey, writings, xiii, 345:
"insolent vaunt of paracelsus, that he would
restore the original rose or violet out of the
ashes settling from its combustion— that is now
rivaled in this modern achievement" ("the
palimpsest of the human brain," suspiria de
profundis). the introductory part of de
quincey's essay deals with the way modern
chemistry had been able to recover the effaced
writing under the latest writing on rolls of
parchment or vellum, which were difficult to
obtain and therefore reused: "the vellum, from
having been the setting of the jewel, has risen at
length to be the jewel itself; and the burden of
thought, from having given the chief value to
the vellum, has now become the chief obstacle 
to its value; nay, has totally extinguished its
value." though this is the thrust of the
beginning of de quincey's argument and seems
to inspire "the rose of paracelsus," the latter
part of the essay turns to memory. this borges
turns to his own uses in "shakespeare's
memory," p. 508, perhaps with the idea of
unifying the volume of stories thereby. it is
perhaps the following lines from de quincey's
essay that inspired the idea in "shakespeare's
memory":
"chemistry, a witch as potent as the erictho
of lucan, has exorted by her torments, from the
dust and ashes of forgotten centuries, the
secrets of a life extinct for the general eye, but
still glowing in the embers... what else than a
natural and mighty palimpsest is the human
brain?... everlasting layers of ideas, images,
feelings have fallen upon your brain softly as
light. each succession has seemed to bury all
that went before. and yet, in reality, not one has
been extinguished." if only we could fan those
embers into fire again... 
shakespeare's memory
p. 512:[dequincey's] master jean paul:
jean paul friedrich richter (1763-1825, pen
name jean paul) was early influenced by
sterne. while his writings on literary aesthetics
influenced carlyle (who translated him) and
many others, it was his dream literature that
influenced novalis and de quincey. 